S1847	K. Voigt;L. Olsson	2008	Molecular phylogenetic and scanning electron microscopical analyses places the Choanephoraceae and the Gilbertellaceae in a monophyletic group within the Mucorales (Zygomycetes, Fungi)	Acta Biologica Hungarica	59	3					A multigene genealogy based on maximum parsimony and distance analyses of the exonic genes for actin (act) and translation elongation factor 1 alpha (tef), the nuclear genes for the small (18S) and large (28S) subunit ribosomal RNA (comprising 807, 1092, 1863, 389 characters, respectively) of essentially all fifty genera of the Mucorales (Zygomycetes) suggests that the Choanephoraceae Schröter form a monophyletic group. The monotypic genus Gilbertella Hesseltine, which is classified into the monogeneric family Gilbertellaceae Benny, appears in close phylogenetic relatedness to the Choanephoraceae. The monophyly of the Choanephoraceae is supported by aberrantly from low to higher ranging bootstrap proportions (67 and 98 % in distance and maximum parsimony analyses, respectively), whereas the monophyly of the Choanephoraceae-Gilbertellaceae clade is supported by high bootstrap values (98 and 100 %) proposing that both families can be joined into one family which leads to the elimination of the Gilbertellaceae as a separate family. In order to validate these relationships single-locus Neighbor-joining analyses were performed on nuclear genes of the 18S, 5.8S, 28S and internal transcribed spacer (ITS) 1 ribosomal RNA and the elongation factor 1 alpha (tef) and beta tubulin (btub) nucleotide sequences. The monophyly of the Choanephoraceae-Gilbertellaceae clade could be confirmed in all gene trees. The ultrastructure of sporangia, sporangiola and sporangiospores show several morphological characters (e.g. longitudinal sutures splitting the sporangial walls, striations and polar ciliate appendages on the sporangiospores) which occur only in the Choanephoraceae-Gilbertellaceae clade. Based on these results and reanalysis of other morphological and physiological evidences from the literature, we propose to fuse the two families Choanephoraceae and Gilbertellaceae into one family, the Choanephoraceae.
S465	J. A. Coddington	1991	Cladistics and spider classification: Araneomorph phylogeny and the monophyly of orb weavers (Araneae: Araneomorphae; Orbiculariae)	Acta Zoologica Fennica	190		75-87				Nineteen new characters pertinent to the phylogeny of the spider suborder Araneomorphae are reviewed and tested against a previous data set, using quantitative cladistic techniques. An hypothesis of cladistic structure within Araneomorphae in the form of a quantitatively analysed cladogram is presented for the first time. The analysis supports orb weaving spiders (Orbiculariae: Deinopoidea and Araneoidea) as a monophyletic group (apparently sister to Dictynoidea) and Linyphiidae as an araneoid family. Likely precursors of orbs are discussed, as are relevant fossil evidence and possible times of origin
S11x5x95c12c16c30	L. E. Graham;C. F. Delwiche;B. D. Mishler	1991	Phylogenetic connections between the 'green algae' and the 'bryophytes'	Advances in Bryology	4		213-244				An updated cladistic analysis of charophycean green algae, focusing on divergence of the embryophyte clade, was derived by application of Wagner parsimony to a data set consisting of morphological, ultrastructural, and biochemical characters. Characters not previously used in such analyses include: sexual growth response (cell-to cell interactions between gametes or zygotes and vegetative thallus cells), post-fertilization enlargement of zygotes, polyphenolic deposition induced by zygote formation, diagonal cell divisions in spermatid ontogeny, cortical microtubule arrays, preprophase microtubule bands, bicentriolar centrosomes, and sporic meiosis. Despite the addition of these new characters, the topology of the most parsimonious tree resulting from their use was remarkably similar to a cladogram previously published by Mishler and Churchill. The present analyses suggest that future biochemical and cellular studies should be focused on the following: the pattern of occurrence of glycolate oxidase and class I aldolases in lower charophytes and putative ancestral flagellates; cell-to-cell growth interactions related to sexual reproduction; cell division and sexual reproduction in Chaetosphaeridium; patterns of involvement of callose in reproductive development; biochemical pathways leading to flavonoid synthesis and polyphenolic deposition in cell walls; cytoskeleton dynamics, phragmoplast development, and structure and rob of plasmodesmata; comparative structure of chloroplasts and pyrenoids; behavior of peroxisomes during cell division-- and the nature of the surface layer present on thalli of some species of Coleochaete. Evidence is presented to support the view that while the archegonium bearing plants may well be polyphyletic or paraphyletic, as has been effectively argued by others, the embryophytes are most likely monophyletic. The molecular, biochemical, and structural evidence suggests that embryophytes are derived from charophycean ancestors similar to Charales and Coleochaete. It is concluded that charophycean algae should be the taxa of choice for use as model experimental systems in which to study the cellular, biochemical, and molecular bases of many embryophyte features, rather than more distantly related green algae.
S1404	D. A. Morrison	2006	Phylogenetic analyses of parasites in the new millennium	Advances in Parasitology	63						Phylogenetic analysis has changed greatly in the last decade, and the most important themes in that change are reviewed here. Sequence data have become the most common source of phylogenetic information. This means that explicit models for evolutionary processes have been developed in a likelihood context, which allow more realistic data analyses. These models are becoming increasingly complex, both for nucleotides and for amino acid sequences, and so all such models need to be quantitatively assessed for each data set, to find the most appropriate one for use in the tree-building analysis. Bayesian analysis has been developed for tree-building and is greatly increasing in popularity. This is because a good heuristic strategy exists, which allows large data sets to be analysed with complex evolutionary models in a practical time. Perhaps the most disappointing aspect of tree interpretation is the ongoing confusion between rooted and unrooted trees, the latter being of very limited practical use for most biological questions. The review finishes with a detailed consideration of the analysis of a multi-gene data set for several dozen taxa of Cryptosporidium (Apicomplexa), illustrating many of the theoretical and practical points highlighted elsewhere.
S1098	A. L. Hipp;P. E. Rothrock;A. A. Reznicek;P. E. Berry	2004	Chromosome number changes associated with speciation in sedges: A phylogenetic study in Carex section Ovales (Cyperaceae) using AFLP data	Aliso	23		193-203				AFLP data recover a tree that is topologically congruent with previous phylogenetic estimates based on nrDNA sequences and provide support for four species groups within ENA Clade I. A maximum likelihood method designed for analysis of restriction site data is used to evaluate the strength of support for alternative topologies. While there is little support for the precise placement of the root, likelihood of topologies in which any of the four clades identified within ENA Clade I is forced to be paraphyletic is much lower than likelihood of the optimal tree. Chromosome counts for a sampling of species from throughout section Ovales are mapped onto the tree as well as counts for all species in ENA Clade I. Parsimony reconstruction of ancestral character states suggest that (1) Heilborn's hypothesis that more highly derived species in Carex have higher chromosome counts does not apply within section Ovales, (2) the migration to Eastern North America involved a decrease in average chromosome count within section Ovales, and (3) intermediate chromosome counts are ancestral within ENA Clade I. A more precise understanding of chromosomal evolution in Carex should be possible using likelihood analyses that take into account the intraspecific polymorphism and wide range of chromosome counts that characterize the genus.
S1890	J. T. Columbus;R. Cerros-Tlatilpa;M. S. Kinney;M. E. Siqueiros-Delgado;H. L. Bell;M. P. Griffith;N. F. Refulio-Rodriguez	2007	Phylogenetics of Chloridoideae (Gramineae): a preliminary study based on nuclear ribosomal internal transcribed spacer and chloroplast trnL-F sequences	Aliso	23		587-601				The phylogeny of Chloridoideae (Gramineae) was inferred from parsimony analyses of DNA sequences from two genomes˜the chloroplast trnL intron, trnL 3? exon, and trnLˆF intergenic spacer, and the nuclear ribosomal internal transcribed spacer region (ITS1 + 5.8S + ITS2). Eighty species representing 66 chloridoid genera were sampled, including all but four of the native New World genera. Analyses of the individual and combined data sets were performed. The phylogenies were found to be highly congruent. Of the four tribes and seven subtribes of Chloridoideae sensu Clayton and Renvoize (1986) whose phylogenetic status could be tested with our taxon sample, only Orcuttieae and Uniolinae were monophyletic. The phylogenies suggested significant homoplasy in morphological traits, including inflorescence type, number of florets per spikelet, and number of lemma nerves. We propose a new classification based on the three main clades in the phylogenies˜tribes Cynodonteae, Eragrostideae, and Zoysieae. The Eragrostideae clade is well resolved and supported and is further divided into three subtribes, Cotteinae, Eragrostidinae, and Uniolinae. Cynodonteae include most of the genera in our study, but the clade is poorly resolved. However, a clade formed of Muhlenbergia and nine other genera is present in both phylogenies and is well resolved and supported. A number of interesting, well-supported relationships are evident in the phylogenies, including PappophorumˆTridens flavus, TragusˆWillkommia, and GouiniaˆTridens muticusˆTriplasisˆVaseyochloa. Except for Bouteloua, no genus represented by multiple species proved to be monophyletic in the phylogenies.
S1141	J. R. Starr;G. Gravel;A. Bruneau;A. M. Muasya	2007	Phylogenetic Implications of a Unique 5.8S nrDNA Insertion in Cyperaceae. Monocots III/Grasses IV	Aliso	23		84-98				The purpose of this study was to assess the phylogenetic utility of a large insertion (3 bp) in the 5.8S gene of nuclear ribosomal DNA (rDNA) in the Cyperaceae and selected Juncaceae. This was done by reconstructing the character evolution of the insertion on a phylogeny derived from rbcL sequences. Results suggest that the insertion was gained once at the base of the Cyperaceae followed by multiple losses in its most derived taxa. Despite several homoplastic loses (CI = 0.20), the pattern of insertion loss (RI = 0.88) and base pair variation within the insertion were useful for defining sedge clades at various taxonomic levels. For example, whereas an indel loss appeared to characterise a major terminal clade within the Cyperaceae, both insertion losses and sequence variation were consistent with infrageneric clades previously discovered in an ITS phylogeny of the genus Eleocharis. The presence/absence of the insertion also supported previous conclusions based on morphological and molecular data that the tribe Scirpeae and the genus Scirpus s.l. are polyphyletic. In the context of our current understanding of Cyperaceae relationships, evolutionary patterns related to this insertion provide additional support for groups defined in prior phylogenetic analyses. Differences between maximum likelihood and parsimony analyses indicated that the paraphyly of Juncaceae and Cyperaceae, as detected in previous molecular analyses, is based upon a chimeric rbcL sequence for the controversial genus Oxychloe (Juncaceae). When the Cyperaceae portion of the molecule is removed, Juncaceae and Cyperaceae are monophyletic, with Oxychloe positioned within a Southern Hemisphere clade of single-flowered genera in the Juncaceae. Keywords: Cyperaceae, 5.8S insertion, ITS region, Juncaceae, Oxychloe, rDNA.
S249	R. K. Jansen;J. D. Palmer	1988	Phylogenetic implications of chloroplast DNA restriction site variation in the Mutisieae (Asteraceae)	American Journal of Botany	75		753-766				Phylogenetic relationships among 13 species in the tribe Mutisieae and a single species from each of three other tribes in the Asteraceae were assessed by chloroplast DNA restriction site mapping Initially, 211 restriction site mutations were detected among 16 species using 10 restriction enzymes. Examination of 12 of these species using nine more enzymes revealed 179 additional restriction site mutations. Phylogenetic analyses of restriction site mutations were performed using both Dollo and Wagner parsimony, and the resulting monophyletic groups were statistically tested by the bootstrap method. The phylogenetic trees confirm an ancient evolutionary split in the Asteraceae that was previously suggested by the distribution of a chloroplast DNA inversion. The subtribe Barnadesiinae of the tribe Mutisieae is shown to be the ancestral group within the Asteraceae. The molecular phylogenies also confirm the paraphyly of the Mutisieae and provide statistical support for the monophyly of three of its four currently recognized subtribes (Barnadesiinae, Mutisiinae, and Nassauviinae). The fourth subtribe, Gochnatiinae, is shown to be paraphyletic. Within the subtribes, several closely related generic pairs are identified. Chloroplast DNA sequence divergence among genera of the Asteraceae ranges between 0.7 and 5.4%, which is relatively low in comparison to other angiosperm groups. This suggests that the Asteraceae is either a relatively young family or that its chloroplast DNA has evolved at a slower rate than in other families.
S2x2x96c16c32c09	E. A. Kellogg	1989	Comments on genomic genera in the Triticeae (Poaceae)	American Journal of Botany	76		796-805				Generic delimitation in the Triticeae has long been problematical because the extensive hybridization in the group is not readily accomodated in a hierarchical classification. The genomic genera of Love (1984) are one solution, but fully one-third of them are polyphyletic, incorporating 2 or more genomes. The suggestion that the tribe be considered a single genus (Stebbins, 1956) is theoretically defensible—the genus would be strictly monophyletic—but probably impractical. This paper presents a cladistic analysis of the tribe that differs from previous analyses in that it uses only strictly monophyletic (monogenomic) groups as terminal taxa; hybrids (heterogenomic groups) are shown as reticulations. Monophyletic groups can then be delimited to minimize the number of polyphyletic genera. A classification incorporating genomic information is derived from the phylogeny.
S11x6x95c09c31c53	R. J. Soreng	1990	Chloroplast-DNA phylogenetics and biogeography in a reticulating group: Study in Poa (Poaceae)	American Journal of Botany	77		1383-1400				Cladistic analysis of Poa chloroplast DNA (cpDNA) restriction sites tested previously hypothesized relationships within the genus. Forty-six taxa representing 19 sections or groups and three subgenera of Poa and two out-group genera, Puccinellia and Bellardiochloa, are analyzed. Five major and several minor cpDNA groups are identified. The cpDNA cladogram is generally congruent with the subgeneric taxonomy of Poa. Exceptions are reclassified or are discussed in terms of character incompatibilities and possible reticulation events. The cpDNA tree detected relationships among sections that were unresolved using traditional character sets and provides a basis for polarization of morphological character states. An assessment of biogeographic events based on the cpDNA tree suggests: 1 ) Poa originated in Eurasia; 2) at least six groups of species independently colonized North America; and 3) two of the latter groups colonized South America, and one closely related group colonized New Zealand and Australia. The cpDNA tree provided a conservative estimate of the number of amphi-neotropical disjunctions when compared to the known number of species disjunctions.
S2x4x96c13c37c50	P. G. Wolf;D. E. Soltis;P. S. Soltis	1990	Chloroplast-DNA and allozymic variation in diploid and autotetraploid Heuchera Grossulariifolia (Saxifragaceae)	American Journal of Botany	77		232-244				Diploid and autotetraploid populations of Heuchera grossulariifolia occur throughout mountainous regions of the Pacific Northwest. Controlled greenhouse crosses indicated that the two cytotypes are largely reproductively isolated. Fourteen diploid and 11 tetraploid populations were analyzed electrophoretically. Individual tetraploid plants expressed up to four alleles per isozyme locus, and tetraploid populations had significantly higher levels of heterozygosity than diploids. Mean observed heterozygosity was 0.159 for tetraploid populations and 0.058 for diploid populations. The patterns of allelic distribution betwecn cytotypes suggested multiple origins of autotetraploids. This hypothesis was supported by restriction-site analysis of chloroplast-DNA (cpDNA) variation which indicated that there had been at least three independent origins of tetraploids. Electrophoretic data, in conjunction with a cpDNA-based phylogeny and geographic distribution of populations, suggest that autopolyploid populations evolved several times as migration of diploids occurred down river systems. This study further supports the contention that autopolyploidy can be a common and successful speciation process in some groups of plants.
S11x5x95c20c33c35	B. Bremer;R. K. Jansen	1991	Comparative restriction site mapping of chloroplast DNA implies new phylogenetic relationships within Rubiaceae	American Journal of Botany	78		198-213				Phylogenetic analyses of 33 species of Rubiaceae were performed using chloroplast DNA restriction site mutations. Complete cleavage maps of eight enzymes were constructed for Psychotria bacteriophila and used as a reference in comparisons among other species. The species examined represent 33 genera from 18 tribes and four subfamilies of the Rubiaceae. A total of 268 restriction site mutations was detected, 161 of which were phylogenetically informative. Wagner and Dollo parsimony trees were compared to the classifications of Verdcourt, Bremekamp, and Robbrecht. The Wagner analysis resulted in six equally parsimonious trees with 348 steps and 54% homoplasy. Dollo analysis resulted in a single most parsimonious tree. Most clades were identical in the two analyses. The subfamily Cinchonoideae is paraphyletic. The subfamilies Antirheoideae, Ixoroideae, and Rubioideae are monophyletic, although their circumscriptions differ from previous classifications. Several new phylogenetic relationships are indicated: the tribe Chiococceae (Ixoroideae) groups with Exostema and Coutarea (Cinchonoideae); the subfamily Ixoroideae including tribe Vanguerieae is closely related to Pogonopus, Pinckneya, Calycophyllum, and Mussaenda (Cinchonoideae); and tribe Hamelieae forms a monophyletic group outside the subfamily Rubioideae.
S279	K. J. Curry;L. M. McDowell;W. S. Judd;W. L. Stern	1991	Osmophores, floral features, and systematics of Stanhopea (Orchidaceae)	American Journal of Botany	78		610-623				The floral fragrance glands (osmophores) of 18 species of Stanhopea and Sievekingia were examined through a series of developmental studies at light and electron microscope levels including late bud stages through postanthesis. Various characters were identified to be of potential systematic value and were recorded for each species. These characters included: texture of the osmophore surface, number of distinct cell layers comprising the osmophore, nature of lipid inclusions in osmophore cells, and presence or absence of plastoglobuli in osmophore amyloplasts. These characters were combined with traditional features of floral lip morphology for cladistic analysis. Sievekingia was the postulated outgroup. Stanhopea ecornuta showed the largest number of plesiomorphic characters. Stanhopea pulla, S. annulata, and S. candida were only slightly more derived. Stanhopea anfracta, S. gibbosa, S. martiana, S. oculata, S. radiosa, S. ruckeri, S. saccata, S. shuttleworthii, S. tigrina, S. vasquezii, and S. wardii form a monophyletic group that can be recognized by a labellum with an articulated epichile and a bicornuate mesochile (or hypochile). Stanhopea tricornis may be a hybrid between a species of Sievekingia and Stanhopea.
S2x3x96c13c09c47	M. Lavin;S. Mathews;C. Hughes	1991	Cholorplast DNA variation in Gliricidia sepium (Leguminosae): Intraspecific phylogeny and tokogeny	American Journal of Botany	78		1576-1585				An analysis of chloroplast DNA restriction site variation in Gliricidia sepium reveals two geographically distinct chloroplast lineages, one in the Yucatan Peninsula and the other along the Pacific Coast in Mexico and Central America. Geographical, morphological, biochemical, and habitat distinctions suggest that these two chloroplast lineages reflect organismal lineages. Within the Pacific coastal chloroplast lineage, there exist sublineages that most likely reflect tokogenetic systems of relationship rather than organismal phylogeny, a hypothesis supported by the co-occurrence of more than one of these chloroplast sublineages in a single population. The genetic distance between any two of these chloroplast lineages ranges from 0.0001 to 0.0024 nucleotide substitutions per site and reveals relatively high levels of intraspecific divergence. We suggest that assessing intraspecific chloroplast DNA variation is important generally in higher level phylogenetic analysis because it enables one to obtain truer estimates of homoplasy, detect potentially cryptic species, and distinguish among molecular markers that reflect phylogenetic vs. tokogenetic relationships. This is in addition to determining the extent of potential complicating factors such as introgression and lineage sorting from polymorphic ancestry.
S2x3x96c16c45c53	L. H. Rieseberg	1991	Homoploid reticulate evolution in Helianthus (Asteraceae): Evidence from ribosomal genes	American Journal of Botany	78		1218-1237				Phylogenetic relationships among the 21 taxa comprising Helianthus sect. Helianthus and three outgroup species were assessed by restriction site mapping of the 1 8S-25S nuclear ribosomal RNA gene family. Wagner parsimony analysis of the 41 restriction site or length mutations observed produced a single 59-step most parsimonious tree. This tree was then compared to a cytoplasmic-based plastid phylogeny for this group. Several major discrepancies were observed between the two phylogenies suggesting both recent and ancient introgression. Furthermore, three cases of diploid hybrid speciation are unambiguously documented and a fourth case is suggested. These data are interpreted to suggest that evolution in Heliathus is reticulate rather than exclusively dichotomous and branching.
S11x6x95c09c42c30	L. E. Talbert;G. M. Magyar;M. Lavin;T. K. Blake;S. L. Moylan	1991	Molecular evidence for the origin of the S-derived genomes of polyploid Triticum species	American Journal of Botany	78		340-349				The genus Triticum includes several polyploid species that arose due to hybridization between two or more diploid species. Section Sitopsis is comprised of five diploid species given the genome designation S. Four polyploid species are recognized that contain an S or S-derived genome. We have used two repetitive DNA sequences found primarily in the S genomes of Triticum to determine the likely diploid progenitors of the polyploid species. Comparison of restriction fragments that hybridize to probes for these sequences suggests that T. speltoides is distinct from other members of section Sitopsis (i.e., T. longissimum, T. bicorne, T. searsii, and T. sharonense). The S-derived genome of T. aestivum is more closely related to T. speltoides than to the other Sitopsis diploids. The restriction fragment pattern of T. timopheevii is 98% identical to that of T. speltoides, while those of T. kotschyi and T. syriacum are identical to the group of diploids represented by T. longissimum, T. bicorne, T. searsii, and T. sharonense. Our results are compatible with previous molecular and biochemical data regarding relationships among Triticum species containing an S or S-derived genome.
S2x7x96c15c33c46	D. A. Waters;M. A. Buchheim;R. A. Dewey;R. L. Chapman	1992	Preliminary inferences of the phylogeny of bryophytes from nuclear-encoded ribosomal RNA sequences	American Journal of Botany	79		459-466				Ribosomal RNA sequences and cladistic analysis were used to infer a phylogeny for eight bryophyte taxa. Portions of the cytoplasmic large (26S-like) and small (18S-like) subunit ribosomal RNA genes were sequenced for three marchantioid liverworts (Asterella, Conocephalum, and Riccia), three mosses (Atrichum, Fissidens, and Plagiomnium), and two hornworts (Phaeoceros and Notothylas). Cladistic analysis of these data suggests that the hornworts are the sister group to the mosses, the mosses and hornworts form a clade that is sister to the tracheophytes, and the liverworts form a clade sister to the other land plants. These results differ from previous cladistic analyses based on morphology, ultrastructure, and biochemistry, wherein the mosses alone are sister group to the tracheophytes. We conclude that cladistic analysis of molecular data can provide an independent data set for the study of bryophyte phylogeny, but the differences between the molecular and morphological results are a topic for further investigation.
S11x6x95c09c20c33	D. E. Soltis;D. R. Morgan;A. Grable;P. S. Soltis;R. Kuzoff	1993	Molecular systematics of Saxifragaceae sensu stricto	American Journal of Botany	80		1056-1081				To circumscribe Saxifragaceae sensu stricto better, as well as to elucidate generic relationships within this group, we sequenced the chloroplast gene rbcL and its 3' flanking region (yielding 1,471 bp) from 19 genera considered to represent core members of Saxifragaceae. In addition, we conducted a restriction site analysis of chloroplast DNA (cpDNA) for 21 core genera using 23 restriction endonucleases. Phylogenetic analyses using both data sets corroborate the results obtained from surveying the distribution of the loss of the intron in the chloroplast gene rpl2 in delimiting a well-defined Saxifragaceae sensu stricto. Within the Saxifragaceae s.s. clade, a number of poorly resolved, basal phylogenetic branches supports the hypothesis that Saxifragaceae s.s. radiated rapidly very early in its evolutionary history. Molecular data also indicate the presence of several strongly supported groups of genera, such as the Boykinia group (Boykinia, Suksdorfia, Bolandra, Sullivantia, Jepsonia, and Telesonix), the Heuchera group (Heuchera, Bensoniella, Conimitella, Elmera, Lithophragma, Mitella, Tellima, Tiarella, and Tolmiea) the Leptarrhena/Tanakaea group, and the Darmera group (Darmera, Astilboides, Mukdenia, Bergenia, and Rodgersia). Significantly, molecular data suggest that the very large, taxonomically complex genus Saxifraga may not be monophyletic. DNA data have also helped to resolve the generic relationships of problematic taxa, indicating, for example, that Telesonix and the enigmatic Jepsonia are sister taxa. In addition to its phylogenetic implications, this study provides insight into basic trends in morphological, chemical, and cytological evolution within Saxifragaceae s.s. The molecular-based phylogenies suggest multiple origins and/or losses of several classes of flavonoid compounds, as well as several independent instances of reduction in stamen and petal number, hypanthium-ovary fusion, and aneuploidy. This study also illustrates the ability of rbcL sequence data to resolve generic-level relationships in some taxonomic groups.
S2x6x96c17c48c00	M. F. Wojciechowski;M. J. Sanderson;B. G. Baldwin;M. J. Donoghue	1993	Monophyly of aneuploid Astragalus (Fabaceae): Evidence from nuclear ribosomal DNA internal transcribed spacer sequences	American Journal of Botany	80		711-722				Evolutionary relationships within Astragalus L. (Fabaceae) were inferred from nucleotide sequence variation in nuclear ribosomal DNA of both New World and Old World species. The internal transcribed spacer regions (ITS) of 18S-26S nuclear ribosomal DNA from representatives of 26 species of Astragalus, three species of Oxytropis DC., and two outgroup taxa were analyzed by polymerase chain reaction amplification and direct DNA sequencing. The length of the ITS I region within these taxa varied from 221 to 231 bp, while ITS 2 varied in length from 207 to 217 bp. Of the aligned, unambiguous positions, approximately 34% were variable in each spacer region. In pairwise comparisons among Astragalus species and outgroup taxa, sequence divergence at these sites ranged from 0 to 1 8.8% in ITS I and from 0 to 21.7% in ITS 2. Parsimony analyses of these sequences resulted in a well-resolved phylogeny that is highly concordant with previous cytogenetic and chloroplast DNA evidence for a major phylogenetic division in the genus. These data suggest that the New World aneuploid species of Astragalus form a monophyletic but morphologically cryptic group derived from euploid species of Old World (Eurasian) origin, which are consequently paraphyletic.
S2x4x96c14c20c12	J. V. Freudenstein	1994	Character transformation and relationships in Corallorhiza (Orchidaceae: Epidendroideae). II. Morphological variation and phylogenetic analysis	American Journal of Botany	81		1458-1467				Morphological and anatomical study of Corallorhiza. a genus of primarily New World leafless mycoparasitic orchids, was undertaken in order to produce a hypothesis of relationships among the species and to gain some understanding of character transformations. Cladistic analysis of the resulting data set gave two most parsimonious trees. Analysis of combined plastid DNA and morphological data yielded a single topology, identical to one of the two from the analysis of morphological data alone. Molecular data do not conflict with the morphological data set, and provide more resolution within the C. maculata complex. The combined data indicate that C. striata is the sister group to the remainder of the genus; the circumboreal C. trifida also occupies a basal position. Corallorhiza wisteriana and C. odontorhiza comprise the sister group to the C. maculata+ C. mertensiana + C. bulbosa clade. Only two synapomorphies, presence of the coralloid rhizome and loss of leaves, unite the species of Corallorhiza. The coralloid rhizome appears to be a paedomorphic development, due to its similarity to a protocorm; if so, it too is a loss character and may be considered only weak support for monophyly of the genus. Predominant autogamy, seen in C. trifida and cleistogamous C. odontorhiza, has probably arisen independently in these taxa.
S228	J. V. Freudenstein;J. J. Doyle	1994	Character transformation and relationships in Corallorhiza (Orchidaceae: Epidendroideae). I. Plastid DNA	American Journal of Botany	81		1449-1457				As part of a phylogenetic study of Corallorhiza. a genus of ten species of leafless mycoparasitic orchids, the large single copy region (LSC) and inverted repeat of plastid DNA were examined with restriction fragment analysis to obtain information on relationships among the species, as well as to determine whether structural changes had occurred in the plastome, Deletion areas of between 1.3 and 6.0 kb were detected in the LSC of the C. maculata complex and C. striata. but most of the genome was not significantly affected. Cladistic analysis of restriction site characters produced one most parsimonious tree; additional accessions screened were shown to be most closely related to the primary accession for each species. No synapomorphy was found to unite Corallorhiza. The same topology resulted when deletion characters were added and indicates that deletions in the region of rpo and psa genes have occurred independently in the C. maculata and C striata groups. Because of the coarse level of resolution in the probing, it is not clear to what extent the genes themselves have been affected. Only one species, the undeleted C. trifida, has been examined physiologically, and it was found to be photosynthetic. This fact, and the deletion pattern, suggest that species of Corallorhiza may show a range of levels of autotrophy.
S2x7x96c17c37c03	T. Mione;R. C. Olmstead;R. K. Jansen;G. J. Anderson	1994	Systematic implications of chloroplast DNA variation in Jaltomata and selected Physaloid genera (Solanaceae)	American Journal of Botany	81		912-918				Chloroplast DNA restriction site data were used to assess relationships among the solanaceous genera Jaltomata, Hebecladus, Old and New World Physalis, Chamaesaracha, Leucophysalis, Margaranthus, Nicandra, and Saracha, and to assess interspecific relationships within Jaltomata. Cladograms rooted with Nicotiana tabacum were constructed with Wagner and Dollo parsimony. Strict consensus trees indicate that Hebecladus onginated from within Jaltomata; together these genera are monophyletic and constitute the recently circumscribed genus Jaltomata. There are two primary clades in Jaltomata: one a morphologically diverse group confined to western (largely Andean) South America, the Greater Antilles, and the Galapagos Islands; and the othcr a morphologically homogeneous group widely distributed from the southwestern United States to Bolivia. The controversial Leucophysalis viscosa, formerly treated as Jaltomata viscosa, is related to Leucophysalis, Physalis, Chamaesaracha, and Margaranthus; it does not group with any of the sampled species of Jaltomata. Physalis appears to be polyphyletic since P. alkekengi of the Old World branches off prior to a clade including Chamaesaracha, Margaranthus, and the two New World Physalis species sampled.
S2x4x96c12c57c00	G. A. Verboom;H. P. Linder;N. P. Barker	1994	Haustorial synergids: An important character in the systematics of Danthonioid grasses (Arundinoideae: Poaceae)	American Journal of Botany	81		1601-1610				The mature ovule and megagametophyte of 42 grass species (23 genera), mostly from the taxonomically troublesome subfamily Arundinoideae, was investigated. Haustorial synergids, first described from the Arundineae, are reported for a further 26 species (ten genera) of danthonioid grasses, a group for which they appear to be synapomorphic. The evolution of this character and a suite of associated integument and nucellar characters is discussed. The danthonioid clade, as defined by haustorial synergids, includes Cortaderia (often treated as nondanthonioid) but excludes a number of taxa currently contained in the Arundineae. The full extent of the group remains undetermined, however, since several of its potential members remain unstudied. The data provide some indication of phylogenetic structure within the clade. At least two of the species of Merxmuellera studied appear to occupy a basal position, while three do not, suggesting that this genus may be paraphyletic, or even polyphyletic. Also, the reduction or absence of synergid haustoria in Prionanthium, Pentaschistis, and Pentameris is considered to be secondarily derived and weakly corroborates the monophyly of this generic cluster as indicated by spikelet morphology.
S2x4x96c13c48c42	A. D. Wolfe;W. J. Elisens	1994	Nuclear ribosomal DNA restriction-site variation in Penstemon section Peltanthera (Scrophulariaceae): An evaluation of diploid hybrid speciation and evidence for introgression	American Journal of Botany	81		1627-1635				Penstemon spectabilis is a putative stabilized diploid hybrid of P. centranthifolius and P. grinnellii. It is morphologically intermediate, and all three species have different pollinators. Penstemon centranthifolius and P. spectabilis have been proposed as parents of P. clevelandii, which is purportedly isolated by ecological factors. Although hybridization between the proposed parental species has been reported, hybrid swarm formation has not been observed and introgression is purported to be minimal. We tested hypotheses of diploid hybrid speciation and introgression among these species based on rDNA restriction-site and length variation for 56 populations within and outside of the hybrid complex. Unambiguous molecular markers clearly differentiated P. centranthifolius, P. grinnellii, and P. spectabilis, whereas P. spectabilis and P. clevelandii had the same rDNA type. The P. centranthifolius rDNA type was found in some populations of P. spectabilis and P. clevelandii, but there was no evidence of the additive profile documented for other recent diploid hybrid species. In contrast, the rDNA profile of P. x parishii had a completely additive profile of its proposed parental species P. centranthifolius and P. spectabilis. Ribosomal DNA markers for P. gnnnellii were restricted to populations within the species and were not found in any population of P. spectabilis. Our data did not support hybrid-speciation hypotheses, but were in accord with allozyme data that provided evidence for introgression between P. centranthifolius and P. grinnellii, P. spectabilis and P. clevelandii. These results were used to propose criteria to differentiate ancient diploid hybrid speciation from patterns of introgression.
S1x29x96c17c45c48	M. H. G. Gustafsson;K. Bremer	1995	Morphology and phylogenetic interrelationships of the Asteraceae, Calyceraceae, Campanulaceae, Goodeniaceae, and related families (Asterales)	American Journal of Botany	82	2	250-265		http://www.jstor.org/stable/2445532		In search for the sister group of the Asteraceae, morphological evidence was assembled for investigating the relationship between the Asteraceae and those families most frequently considered to be their closest relatives, in particular the Calyceraceae, Campanulaceae (along with the frequently included Lobeliaceae, Cyphiaceae, Cyphocarpaceae, and Nemacladaceae), and Goodeniaceae (and the sometimes included Brunoniaceae). Several other families that have been associated with this group of families, the Asterales-Campanulales-complex, were also considered: Pentaphragmataceae, Sphenocleaceae, Stylidiaceae, Donatiaceae, Menyanthaceae, and Argophyllaceae. In order to delineate the complex more precisely, another eight putatively related families were also included in the analysis. Cladistic parsimony analysis of 46 morphological and chemical characters for the 23 families was undertaken. Stability of the branches was estimated by the number of extra steps necessary to lose the group, as well as by the number of reweighted extra steps (using rescaled consistency indices) necessary to lose the group (a new approach). The results indicate that there is a monophyletic group of 14 families comprising those of the Asterales-Campanulales-complex as well as Pentaphragmataceae, Sphenocleaceae, Stylidiaceae, Donatiaceae, and Menyanthaceae; this group is recognized as the order Asterales. Within the order, the Asteraceae, Calyceraceae, Brunoniaceae, and Goodeniaceae form one comparatively well-supported clade and the five families of the Campanulaceae sensu lato form another well-supported clade.
S2x3x96c13c29c27	R. T. Pennington	1995	Cladistic analysis of chloroplast DNA restriction site characters in Andira (Leguminosae: Dalbergieae)	American Journal of Botany	82	4	526-534		http://www.jstor.org/stable/2445701		Chloroplast DNA (cpDNA) restriction site variation was examined in 29 accessions, representing 29 populations of 17 species of Andira (Leguminosae, Papilionoideae, tribe Dalbergieae). This sample spans the morphological and geographical diversity of this poorly known, woody genus of approximately 30 species, which occurs throughout the neotropics, with one species in Africa. Cladistic analysis of 38 restriction site characters generated 182 equally most-parsimonious trees. The strict consensus tree preserved four well-supported clades, which are incongruent with previous infrageneric classifications of Andira. None of these clades has been recognized by previous workers, and three are not marked by any major morphological innovations. There were few restriction site differences between closely related species, but two (possibly three) species showed intraspecific cpDNA polymorphism, which probably reflects processes of hybridization with subsequent introgression, or lineage sorting.
S2x3x96c13c46c17	M. Pillay;K. W. Hilu	1995	Chloroplast-DNA restriction site analysis in the genus Bromus (Poaceae)	American Journal of Botany	82	2	239-249		http://www.jstor.org/stable/2445531		Chloroplast DNA (cpDNA) restriction site variation was examined in 32 species, representing five subgenera, of Bromus (Poaceae). Thirty-seven phylogenetically informative restriction sites were detected. Cladistic analysis of the restriction site data produced a single most-parsimonious tree of 50 steps. The cladogram indicated two major clades within the genus. One clade included B. trinii of subgenus Neobromus and species of subgenus Ceratochloa. The other was composed of subgenera Festucaria, Stenobromus, and Bromus. Within the second clade, species of subgenus Festucaria appeared in three lineages. The second clade also contained an assemblage of species belonging to subgenera Stenobromus and Bromus in a separate lineage. There was very little resolution of relationships in this assemblage since several species appeared individually in separate lineages. The cpDNA phylogenetic hypothesis did not separate species of subgenera Stenobromus and Bromus into well-defined clades as circumscribed by morphology and cytogenetics. The cpDNA tree is in agreement with the phylogenetic scheme based on traditional data in that: 1) subgenera Neobromus and Ceratochloa were the first to diverge, while Bromus and Stenobromus diverged later; 2) within the genus Bromus species with small chromosomes are ancestral; and 3) subgenera Bromus and Stenobromus probably originated from similar ancestors as Festucaria. The tree based on cpDNA data does not support that: 1) subgenera Neobromus and Ceratochloa did not have a common origin; 2) subgenus Festucaria is monophyletic; and 3) subgenera Stenobromus and Bromus are distinct entities. The mean nucleotide sequence divergence values between pairs of subgenera ranged from p = 0.0 to 0.9. These values suggest that cpDNA evolution in Bromus is slow.
S447	D. J. Bogler;B. B. Simpson	1996	Phylogeny of Agavaceae based on ITS rDNA sequence variation	American Journal of Botany	83	9	1225-1235		http://www.jstor.org/stable/2446206	Agavaceae; Convallariaceae; Dracaenaceae; internal transcribed spacer; molecular systematics; Nolinaceae	Several systems of classification have been proposed for the family Agavaceae. A distinctive bimodal karyotype and similarities of fruits and seeds strongly support close relationships among Yucca, Hesperaloe, Beschorneria, Furcraea, Agave, Manfreda, Polianthes, Prochnyanthes, and perhaps Hosta. However, Dasylirion, Beaucarnea, Nolina, Calibanus, Dracaena, and Sansevieria differ in so many cytological and morphological features that many have concluded they should be excluded from Agavaceae and separated into two families, Nolinaceae and Dracaenaceae Chloroplast DNA restriction site data support these separations and indicate that Nolinaceae and Dracaenaceae are very close to Convallariaceae (Maianthemum, Convallaria, Aspidistra, Liriope, etc.) In this paper we report the results of an ITS rDNA sequencing study of 40 taxa in Agavaceae sensu lato and related groups in the order Asparagales. Sequence alignments were optimized using the Consistency Index, Retention Index, and Rescaled Consistency Index to find the alignment that exhibited the least amount of homoplasy. The results of our study are congruent with the conclusions drawn from cytological, immunological, cpDNA, and rbcL studies, which support a narrow interpretation of Agavaceae and a close relationship among Convallariaceae, Dracaenaceae, and Nolinaceae. In addition, the ITS sequence data provide evidence for some interesting relationships within these families.
S753	M. Lavin;E. Eshbaugh;J. M. Hu;S. Mathews;R. A. Sharrock	1998	Monophyletic subgroups of the tribe Millettieae (Leguminosae) as revealed by phytochrome nucleotide sequence data	American Journal of Botany	85	3	412-433		http://www.amjbot.org/cgi/content/abstract/85/3/412	Leguminosae; phylogeny; phytochrome genes	Phylogenetic analysis of phytochrome (PHY) genes reveals the identity and relationships of four PHY loci among papilionoid Leguminosae. A phylogenetic analysis of loci combined according to species suggests that most of the tribe Millettieae belongs to one of two monophyletic clades: the Derris-Lonchocarpus or the Tephrosia clade. Together these two form a monophyletic group that is sister to a lineage represented by Millettia grandis of Millettia sect. Compresso-gemmatae. Collectively, this large monophyletic group is referred to as the Millettieae-core groups, which based on our sampling, includes species of Millettieae that do not accumulate the nonprotein amino acid canavanine and that mostly have pseudoracemose or pseudopaniculate inflorescences. This new phylogenetic framework assists in targeting additional taxa for future sampling. For example, the American Derris (Deguelia), which accumulate canavanine, might not be members of the Millettieae core group. Afgekia is also predicted not to be a member because it accumulates canavanine and has an inflorescence of terminal racemes. PHY gene analysis specifically reveals that certain genera traditionally classified in Millettieae are actually distantly related to the Millettieae core groups, such as Austrosteenisia, Callerya, Craibia, Cyclolobium, Fordia, Platycyamus, Poecilanthe, and Wisteria.
S506	J. E. Rodman;P. S. Soltis;D. E. Soltis;K. J. Sytsma;K. G. Karol	1998	Parallel evolution of glucosinolate biosynthesis inferred from congruent nuclear and plastid gene phylogenies	American Journal of Botany	85	7	997-1006		http://www.amjbot.org/cgi/content/abstract/85/7/997	Capparales s.l.; DNA sequencing; glucosinolates; phylogeny; rDNA (18S)	The phytochemical system of mustard-oil glucosides (glucosinolates) accompanied by the hydrolytic enzyme myrosinase (beta-thioglucosidase), the latter usually compartmented in special myrosin cells, characterizes plants in 16 families of angiosperms. Traditional classifications place these taxa in many separate orders, and thus imply multiple convergences in the origin of this chemical defense system. DNA sequencing of the chloroplast rbcL gene for representatives of all 16 families and several putative relatives, with phylogenetic analyses by parsimony and maximum likelihood methods, demonstrated instead a single major clade of mustard-oil plants and one phylogenetic outlier. In a further independent test, DNA sequencing of the nuclear 18S ribosomal RNA gene for all these exemplars has yielded the same result, a major mustard-oil clade of 15 families (Akaniaceae, Bataceae, Brassicaceae, Bretschneideraceae, Capparaceae, Caricaceae, Gyrostemonaceae, Koeberliniaceae, Limnanthaceae, Moringaceae, Pentadiplandraceae, Resedaceae, Salvadoraceae, Tovariaceae, and Tropaeolaceae) and one outlier, the genus Drypetes, traditionally placed in Euphorbiaceae. Concatenating the two gene sequences (for a total of 3254 nucleotides) in a data set for 33 taxa, we obtain robust support for this finding of parallel origins of glucosinolate biosynthesis. From likely cyanogenic ancestors, the mustard oil bomb was invented twice.
S227	D. A. Steane;R. W. Scotland;D. J. Mabberly;R. G. Olmstead	1998	Molecular systematics of Clerodendrum (Lamiaceae): ITS sequencesces and total evidence	American Journal of Botany	86	1	98–107		http://www.amjbot.org/cgi/content/abstract/86/1/98	chloroplast DNA; Clerodendrum; Cyclonema; internal transcribed spacer; Lamiaceae	Thirty-three species of Clerodendrum s.l. and five outgroup genera were included in a sequence analysis of internal transcribed spacers of the nuclear ribosomal DNA. The results of the cladistic analysis were compared to and combined with cpDNA restriction site data from a previous study. All molecular data identified four major clades within Clerodendrum s.l. and showed the genus to be polyphyletic. Clerodendrum s.s., minus Konocalyx and Cyclonema, is monophyletic and the genus should be restricted to this group. Cyclonema and Konocalyx form a clade distinct from Clerodendrum s.s. which has been recognized as Rotheca Raf. (Steane and Mabberley, 1998).
S388	W. S. Alverson;B. A. Whitlock;R. Nyffeler;C. Bayer;D. A. Baum	1999	Phylogeny of the core Malvales: evidence from ndhF sequence data	American Journal of Botany	86	10	1474-1486		http://www.amjbot.org/cgi/content/abstract/86/10/1474	angiosperm phylogeny; Bombacaceae; Malvaceae; Malvales; ndhF; phylogenetic nomenclature; stamen evolution; Sterculiaceae; Tiliaceae	William S. Alverson, Barbara A. Whitlock, Reto Nyffeler, Clemens Bayer, and David A. Baum. In press. Phylogeny of the core Malvales: evidence from ndhF data. American Journal of Botany (12/21/98 version here). The monophyly of the group comprising the core malvalean families, Bombacaceae, Malvaceae, Sterculiaceae, and Tiliaceae, was recently confirmed by molecular studies, but the internal structure of this clade is poorly understood. In this study, we examined sequences of the chloroplast ndhF gene (aligned length 2226 bp) from 70 exemplars representing 35 of the 40 putative tribes or subfamilies of core Malvales. The monophyly of one traditional family, the Malvaceae, was strongly supported in the trees resulting from these data, but the other three families, as traditionally circumscribed, are nonmonophyletic. In addition, the following relationships were well supported: (1) a clade (/Malvatheca) consisting of traditional Malvaceae and Bombacaceae (except some members of tribe Durioneae), plus Fremontodendron and Chiranthodendron, which are usually treated as Sterculiaceae; (2) a clade (/Malvadendrina) supported by a unique 21-bp (base pair) deletion and consisting of /Malvatheca, plus five additional subclades, including representatives of Sterculiaceae and Tiliaceae, plus Durio and Neesia (both Durionieae); 3) a clade (/Byttneriina) with genera traditionally assigned to several tribes of Tiliaceae, plus exemplars of tribes Byttnerieae, Hermannieae, and Lasiopetaleae of Sterculiaceae. The most striking departures from traditional classifications are the following: Durio and relatives appear to be more closely related to Helicteres and Reevesia (Sterculiaceae) than to Bombacaceae; several genera traditionally considered as Bombacaceae (Camptostemon, Matisia, Phragmotheca, and Quararibea) or Sterculiaceae (Chiranthodendron and Fremontodendron) appear as sister lineages to the traditional Malvaceae; tribe Helictereae (Sterculiaceae) is polyphyletic; and Sterculiaceae and Tiliaceae, as traditionally circumscribed, represent polyphyletic groups that cannot sensibly be maintained with their traditional limits for purposes of classification. We discuss morphological characters supporting the clades indicated by molecular data. These findings indicate extensive homoplasy of many morphological characters previously used to delineate taxonomic groups in core Malvales. The topologies here also suggest that /Malvatheca (the malvoid and bombacoid clades) do not have as a synapormophy monothecate anthers, as has been previously supposed but, instead, may be united by the dithecate, transversely septate (polysporangiate) anthers in basal members of both clades, from which monothecate anthers may have been derived at least twice. Key words: angiosperm phylogeny; phylogenetic nomenclature; rankless taxa; stamen evolution; Bombacaceae; Malvaceae; Malvales; Sterculiaceae; Tiliaceae. Baum, D. A., W. S. Alverson, and R. N. Nyffeler. 1998. A durian by any other name: taxonomy and nomenclature of the core Malvales. Harvard Papers in Botany 3: 317-332. The phylogeny of the core Malvales (including plants traditionally placed in the families Bombacaceae, Malvaceae, Sterculiaceae, and Tiliaceae) has been greatly clarified by recent molecular systematic studies. In this paper we explore the options available for incorporating this phylogenetic information into a classification for the group. We first discuss a range of options within the traditional system of nomenclature with the added constraint of only recognizing monophyletic groups. These schemes differ in the ranks applied and in the degree to which currently used names continue to apply to familiar groups. We then propose an alternative set of unranked names within the framework of phylogenetic nomenclature. This phylogenetic classification shares the same names as a recently published traditional classification, except that the phylogenetic names are distinguished by a clademark. We note some advantages of phylogenetic nomenclature: monophyly of taxa can be ass med; there is no limit to the number of nested clades that can be named; classifications are stable so long as phylogenetic knowledge does not change, and; it will be easy to establish useful data base resources. The traditional and phylogenetic classifications of the core Malvales are almost identical given current knowledge of phylogeny. Therefore, this group provides a controlled experiment with which to see how the two nomenclatural codes perform in practice as phylogenetic knowledge increases.
S759	J. M. Hu;M. Lavin;M. F. Wojciechowski;M. J. Sanderson	2000	Phylogenetic systematics of the tribe Millettieae (Leguminosae) based on chloroplast trnK/matK sequences and its implications for evolutionary patterns in Papilionoideae	American Journal of Botany	87	3	418-430		http://www.amjbot.org/cgi/content/abstract/87/3/418	Fabaceae;  matK; Millettieae; Papilionoideae; phylogeny; trnK	Phylogenetic relationships in the tribe Millettieae and allies in the subfamily Papilionoideae (Leguminosae) were recon-structed from chloroplast trnK/matK sequences. Sixty-two accessions representing 57 traditionally recognized genera of Papilionoideae were sampled, including 27 samples from Millettieae. Phylogenies were constructed using maximum parsi-mony and are well resolved and supported by high bootstrap values. A well-supported "core Millettieae" clade is recognized, comprising the four large genera Millettia, Lonchocarpus, Derris, and Tephrosia. Several other small genera of Millettieae are not in the core Millettieae clade. Platycyamus is grouped with Phaseoleae (in part). Ostryocarpus, Austrosteenisia, and Dalbergiella are neither in the core Millettieae or Phaseoleae clade. These taxa, along with core Millettieae and Phaseoleae, form a monophyletic sister group to Indigofereae. Cyclolobium and Poecilanthe are close to Brongniartieae. Callerya and Wisteria belong to a large clade that includes all the legumes that lack the inverted repeat in their chloroplast genome, which confirms previous rbcL and phytochrome gene family phylogenies. The evolutionary history of four characters was examined in Millettieae and allies: the presence of canavanine, inflorescence types, the dehiscence of pods, and the presence of winged pods. trnK/matK sequence analysis suggests that the presence of a pseudoraceme or pseudopanicle and the accumulation of nonprotein amino acids are phylogenetically informative for Millettieae and allies with only a few exceptions.
S1974	G. D. Weiblen	2000	Phylogenetic relationships of functionally dioecious Ficus (Moraceae) based on ribosomal DNA sequences and morphology	American Journal of Botany	87	9	1342-1357		http://www.amjbot.org/cgi/content/abstract/87/9/1342	breeding system evolution; coevolution; dioecy; Ficus; Moraceae; phylogeny;  pollination	Figs (Ficus, Moraceae) are either monoecious or gynodioecious depending on the arrangement of unisexual florets within the specialized inflorescence or syconium. The gynodioecious species are functionally dioecious due to the impact of pollinating fig wasps (Hymenoptera: Agaonidae) on the maturation of fig seeds. The evolutionary relationships of functionally dioecious figs (Ficus subg. Ficus) were examined through phylogenetic analyses based on the internal transcribed spacer (ITS) region of nuclear ribosomal DNA and morphology. Forty-six species representing each monoecious subgenus and each section of functionally dioecious subg. Ficus were included in parsimony analyses based on 180 molecular characters and 61 morphological characters that were potentially informative. Separate and combined analyses of molecular and morphological data sets suggested that functionally dioecious figs are not monophyletic and that monoecious subg. Sycomorus is derived within a dioecious clade. The combined analysis indicated one or two origins of functional dioecy in the genus and at least two reversals to monoecy within a functionally dioecious lineage. The exclusion of breeding system and related characters from the analysis also indicated two shifts from monoecy to functional dioecy and two reversals. The associations of pollinating fig wasps were congruent with host fig phylogeny and further supported a revised classification of Ficus.
S690	L. M. Giussani;J. H. Cota-Sánchez;F. O. Zuloaga;E. A. Kellogg	2001	A molecular phylogeny of the grass subfamily Panicoideae (Poaceae) shows multiple origins of C4 photosynthesis	American Journal of Botany	88	11	1993–2012		http://www.amjbot.org/cgi/content/abstract/88/11/1993	C4 photosynthesis; ndhF; Panicoideae; Poaceae	DNA sequence data from the chloroplast gene ndhF were analyzed to estimate the phylogeny of the subfamily Panicoideae, with emphasis on the tribe Paniceae. Our data suggest that the subfamily is divided into three strongly supported clades, corresponding to groups with largely identical base chromosome numbers. Relationships among the three clades are unclear. In unweighted parsimony analyses, the two major clades with x = 10 (Andropogoneae and x = 10 Paniceae) are weakly supported as sister taxa. The third large clade corresponds to x = 9 Paniceae. In analyses under implied weight, the two clades of Paniceae are sisters, making the tribe monophyletic. Neither resolution is strongly supported.; Our molecular phylogenies are not congruent with previous classifications of tribes or subtribes. Based on this sample of species, we infer that C4 photosynthesis has evolved independently several times, although a single origin with multiple reversals and several reacquisitions is only slightly less parsimonious. The phosphoenol pyruvate carboxykinase (PCK) subtype of C4 photosynthesis has evolved only once, as has the NAD-malic enzyme (ME) subtype; all other origins are NADP-ME. Inflorescence bristles are apparently homologous in the genera Setaria and Pennisetum, contrary to opinions of most previous authors. Some genera, such as Digitaria, Echinochloa, and Homolepis are supported as monophyletic. The large genus Paspalum is shown to be paraphyletic, with Thrasya derived from within it. As expected, Panicum is polyphyletic, with lineages derived from multiple ancestors across the tree. Panicum subg. Panicum is monophyletic. Panicum subg. Dichanthelium, subg. Agrostoides, and subg. Phanopyrum are unrelated to each other, and none is monophyletic. Only Panicum subg. Dichanthelium sect. Dichanthelium, represented by P. sabulorum and P. koolauense, is monophyletic. Panicum subg. Megathyrsus, a monotypic subgenus including only the species P. maximum, is better placed in Urochloa, as suggested by other authors.
S558	B. Gravendeel;M. W. Chase;E. F. de Vogel;M. C. Roos;T. H. M. Mes;K. Bachmann	2001	Molecular phylogeny of Coelogyne (Epidendroideae; Orchidaceae) based on plastid RFLPs, matK, and nuclear ribosomal ITS sequences: evidence for polyphyly	American Journal of Botany	88	10	1915–1927		http://www.amjbot.org/cgi/content/abstract/88/10/1915	Coelogyne; Coelogyninae; matK; molecular phylogeny; nrDNA ITS; Orchidaceae; plastid DNA RFLPs	To evaluate the monophyly of Coelogyne (Epidendroideae; Orchidaceae) and reveal sectional relationships and relations to allied genera in subtribe Coelogyninae, we collected PCR (polymerase chain reaction) amplified restriction fragment length polymorphisms (RFLPs) from 11 plastid regions for 42 taxa (28 Coelogyne species and 14 representatives of other genera) and three outgroups from Bletiinae and Thuniinae. We also sequenced a large portion of the plastid trnK intron (mostly matK) and the nuclear ribosomal DNA internal transcribed spacers ITS1 and ITS2 (including the 5.8S gene). Separate phylogenetic analyses on each data set using maximum parsimony produced mainly congruent (except for the position of Panisea) but weakly supported clades. Parsimony analysis of the combined data clearly identified three main clades in Coelogyninae. Whereas Coelogyninae are monophyletic, Coelogyne is polyphyletic, with species falling into at least two well-supported clades. The utility of morphological characters used in previous classifications was explored by reconstructing character state evolution on one of the four molecular trees. Lip base and petal shape were homoplasious, whereas ovary indumentum and flower number were congruent with well-supported groups. The implications of our results for the classification of Coelogyne are discussed, and a reorganization of the genus by including Neogyna and Pholidota and removing several species is proposed.
S472	P. Inderbitzin;S. Landvik;M. A. Abdel-Wahab;M. L. Berbee	2001	Aliquandostipitaceae, a new family for two new tropical ascomycetes with unusually wide hyphae and dimorphic ascomata	American Journal of Botany	88	1	52-61		http://www.amjbot.org/cgi/content/abstract/88/1/52	Ascomycota; East Asia; fungal biodiversity; Loculoascomycetes; microfungi; phylogeny; taxonomy; tropical mycology	In two short surveys of lignicolous, fruitbody-forming ascomycetes in Thailand and southern China, six species were found, of which five were new to science. Two fungi with affinity to the Dothideomycetes, one from Thailand and one from China, are described here in the new genus Aliquandostipite and included in the new family Aliquandostipitaceae. Aliquandostipite khaoyaiensis was found in a tropical rain forest in Thailand, and A. sunyatsenii in a small stream in southern China. Both new species are closely related based on morphological and molecular characteristics and with uncertain affinity to other taxa of the Euascomycetes based on phylogenetic analyses of SSU rDNA sequences. The distinguishing features of the new species are the presence of both sessile and stalked ascomata side by side on the substratum and the widest hyphae known from ascomycetes.
S752	M. Lavin;R. T. Pennington;B. B. Klitgaard;J. I. Sprent;H. Cavalcante de Lima;P. E. Gasson	2001	The Dalbergioid Legumes (Fabaceae): delimitation of a pantropical monophyletic clade	American Journal of Botany	88	3	503-533		http://www.amjbot.org/cgi/content/abstract/88/3/503	aeschynomenoid nodule; dalbergioid legumes; Fabaceae; papilionoid legumes; root nodule	A monophyletic pantropical group of papilionoid legumes, here referred to as the "dalbergioid" legumes, is circumscribed to include all genera previously referred to the tribes Aeschynomeneae and Adesmieae, the subtribe Bryinae of the Desmodieae, and tribe  Dalbergieae except Andira, Hymenolobium, Vatairea, and Vataireopsis. This previously undetected group was discovered with phylogenetic  analysis of DNA sequences from the chloroplast trnK (including matK) and trnL introns, and the nuclear ribosomal 5.8S and flanking internal transcribed spacers 1 and 2. All dalbergioids belong to one of three well-supported subclades, the Adesmia,  Dalbergia, and Pterocarpus clades. The dalbergioid clade and its three main subclades are cryptic in the sense that they are genetically distinct but poorly, if at all, distinguished by nonmolecular data. Traditionally important taxonomic characters, such as arborescent habit, free stamens, and lomented pods, do not provide support for the major clades identified by the molecular analysis. Short shoots, glandular-based trichomes, bilabiate calyces, and aeschynomenoid root nodules, in contrast, are better indicators of relationship at this hierarchical level. The discovery of the dalbergioid clade prompted a re-analysis of root nodule structure and the subsequent finding that the aeschynomenoid root nodule is synapomorphic for the dalbergioids.
S636	U. Peintner;N. L. Bougher;M. A. Castellano;J. M. Moncalvo;M. M. Moser;J. M. Trappe;R. Vilgalys	2001	Multiple origins of sequestrate fungi related to Cortinarius (Cortinariaceae)	American Journal of Botany	88	12	2168-2179		http://www.amjbot.org/cgi/content/abstract/88/12/2168	Cortinarius; Descomyces; Descolea; Hymenogaster; phylogeny; Protoglossum; Thaxterogaster; Quadrispora	The aim of the present study was to investigate the phylogeny and evolution of sequestrate fungi (with gastroid or partially exposed basidiomes) in relation to their gilled relatives from the Cortinariaceae (Basidiomycetes). Phylogenetic analyses of 151 ITS sequences from 77 gilled species and 37 sequestrate taxa were performed using maximum parsimony and maximum likelihood methods. Results show that sequestrate basidiome forms occur in all three major ectomycorrhizal lineages of Cortinariaceae: the clades Cortinarius, Hebeloma/Hymenogaster/Naucoria, and Descolea. However, these forms do not appear within the saprobic outgroup Gymnopilus, indicating multiple origins of sequestrate forms from ectomycorrhizal ancestors. Additionally, within the Cortinarius clade sequestrate forms have multiple origins: emergent Cortinarius spp., Thaxterogaster, Quadrispora, Protoglossum, and two Hymenogaster spp. (H. remyi, H. sublilacinus) share common ancestors with Cortinarius spp., but these sequestrate genera are not closely related to each other (with exception of Thaxterogaster and Quadrispora). Hymenogaster sensu stricto, Setchelliogaster, and Descomyces were placed in the two other major clades. Thus, sequestrate taxa evolved independently many times within brown-spored Agaricales. Furthermore, emergent, secotioid, and gastroid forms have evolved independently from each other, and so are not necessarily intermediate forms. After their establishment, these apparently morphologically stable taxa show a tendency to radiate.
S476	M. P. Simmons;C. C. Clevinger;V. Savolainen;R. H. Archer;S. Mathews;J. J. Doyle	2001	Phylogeny of the Celastraceae inferred from phytochrome B gene sequence and morphology	American Journal of Botany	88	2	313-325		http://www.amjbot.org/cgi/content/abstract/88/2/313	Brexia; Celastraceae; Goupia; Hippocrateaceae; nuclear gene family; phylogeny; phytochrome B; Plagiopteron	Phylogenetic relationships within Celastraceae were inferred using a simultaneous analysis of 61 morphological characters and 1123 base pairs of phytochrome B exon 1 from the nuclear genome. No gaps were inferred, and the gene tree topology suggests that the primers were specific to a single locus that did not duplicate among the lineages sampled. This region of phytochrome B was most useful for examining relationships among closely related genera. Fifty-one species from 38 genera of Celastraceae were sampled. The Celastraceae sensu lato (including Hippocrateaceae) were resolved as a monophyletic group. Loesener's subfamilies and tribes of Celastraceae were not supported. The Hippocrateaceae were resolved as a monophyletic group nested within a paraphyletic Celastraceae sensu stricto. Goupia was resolved as more closely related to Euphorbiaceae, Corynocarpaceae, and Linaceae than to Celastraceae. Plagiopteron (Flacourtiaceae) was resolved as the sister group of Hippocrateoideae. Brexia (Brexiaceae) was resolved as closely related to Elaeodendron and Pleurostylia. Canotia was resolved as the sister group of Acanthothamnus within Celastraceae. Perrottetia and Mortonia were resolved as the sister group of the rest of the Celastraceae. Siphonodon was resolved as a derived member of Celastraceae. Maytenus was resolved as three disparate groups, suggesting that this large genus needs to be recircumscribed.
S686	P. B. Matheny;Y. L. Liu;J. F. Ammirati;B. D. Hall	2002	Using RPB1 sequences to improve phylogenetic inference among mushrooms (Inocybe, Agaricales)	American Journal of Botany	89	4	688–698		http://www.amjbot.org/cgi/content/abstract/89/4/688	Agaricales; Inocybe; molecular phylogeny; nuclear large subunit ribosomal DNA; RNA polymerase II; RPB1	An investigation of mushroom phylogeny using the largest subunit of RNA polymerase II gene sequences (RPB1) was conducted in comparison with nuclear ribosomal large subunit RNA gene sequences (nLSU) for the same set of taxa in the genus Inocybe (Agaricales, Basidiomycota). The two data sets, though not significantly incongruent, exhibit conflict among the placement of two taxa that exhibit long branches in the nLSU data set. In contrast, RPB1 terminal branch lengths are rather uniform. Bootstrap support is increased for clades in RPB1. Combined data sets increase the degree of confidence for several relationships. Overall, nLSU data do not yield a robust phylogeny when independently assessed by RPB1 sequences. This multigene study indicates that Inocybe is a monophyletic group composed of at least four distinct lineages—subgenus Mallocybe, section Cervicolores, section Rimosae, and subgenus Inocybe sensu Kühner, Kuyper, non Singer. Within subgenus Inocybe, two additional lineages, one composed of species with smooth basidiospores (clade I) and a second characterized by nodulose-spored species (clade II), are recovered by RPB1 and combined data. The nLSU data recover only clade I. The genera Astrosporina and Inocybella cannot be recognized phylogenetically. "Supersections" Cortinatae and Marginatae are not monophyletic groups.
S763	P. B. Pelser;B. Gravendeel;R. van der Meijden	2002	Tackling speciose genera: species composition and phylogenetic position of Senecio sect. Jacobaea (Asteraceae) based on plastid and nrDNA sequences	American Journal of Botany	89	6	929-939		http://www.amjbot.org/cgi/content/abstract/89/6/929	Asteraceae; nr ITS; sect. Jacobaea; Senecio; Senecioninae; systematics; trnK; trnL-F	The molecular phylogeny of Senecio sect. Jacobaea (Asteraceae; Senecioneae) was studied to clarify species composition and interspecific relationships of Senecio sect. Jacobaea. This information is necessary for studies seeking explanations of the evolutionary success of Senecio, in terms of high species numbers and the evolution of chemical defense mechanisms. Parsimony analyses with 60 species of the tribe Senecioneae, representing 23 genera and 11 sections of Senecio, based on DNA sequence data of the plastid genome (the trnT-L intergenic spacer, the trnL intron, and two parts of the trnK intron, flanking both sides of the matK gene) and nuclear genome (ITS1, 5.8S, and ITS2 gene and spacers) show that sect. Jacobaea is a strongly supported monophyletic group. Fifteen species have been identified as members of section Jacobaea, including three species that have been consistently ascribed to this section in taxonomic literature and 12 species that were either placed in other sections of Senecio or not exclusively ascribed to sect. Jacobaea. This section was traditionally circumscribed as a group of European, biennial, or perennial herbs with pinnately incised leaves, but the results of this study show that one annual species, a species from northeastern Asia, and a species growing in the Himalayas are members of sect. Jacobaea as well. Furthermore, not all species in the section have pinnately incised leaves. The genera Emilia, Packera, and Pseudogynoxys form the sister clade of sect. Jacobaea, but this relationship lacks strong bootstrap support and thus remains provisional.
S733	D. M. Percy;Q. C. B. Cronk	2002	Different fates of island brooms: contrasting evolution in Adenocarpus, Genista and Teline (Genisteae, Fabaceae) in the Canary Islands and Madeira	American Journal of Botany	89	5	854-864		http://www.amjbot.org/cgi/content/abstract/89/5/854	Adenocarpus; biogeography; Fabaceae; Genista; Genisteae; island endemism; Macaronesia; molecular phylogeny; radiation; Teline	Analysis of sequence data from the internal transcribed spacers (ITS) and 5.8S region of nuclear ribosomal DNA show that Canarian and Madeiran brooms (Genisteae) of the genera Teline, Adenocarpus, and Genista are related to Mediterranean species and not to species from adjacent parts of Morocco. Each separate colonization of the islands has resulted in contrasting patterns of adaptation and radiation. The genus Teline is polyphyletic, with both groups (the "T. monspessulana group" and the "T. linifolia group") separately nested within Genista. Genista benehoavensis (La Palma) and G. tenera (Madeira) form, with G. tinctoria of Europe, a single clade characterized by vestigially arillate seeds. The Canarian species of Adenocarpus have almost identical sequence to the Mediterranean A. complicatus and are likely to be the result of island speciation after a very recent colonization event. This Canarian/Mediterranean A. complicatus group is sister to the afrotropical montane A. mannii which is probably derived from an earlier colonization from the Mediterranean, possibly via the Red Sea hills. The independent colonization and subsequent radiation of the two Teline groups in the Canary Islands make an interesting comparison: the phylogenies both show geographical structuring, each with a central and western island division of taxa. Within the "T. monspessulana group" there is some evidence that both continental and Madeiran taxa could be derived from the Canary Islands, although it is likely that near contemporaneous speciation occurred via rapid colonization of the mainland and islands. The finding of two groups within Teline also has implications for patterns of hybridization in those parts of the world where Teline species are invasive; in California members of the T. monspessulana group hybridize readily, but no hybrids have been recorded with T. linifolia which has been introduced in the same areas.
S722	S. J. Wagstaff;J. Wege	2002	Patterns of diversification in New Zealand Stylidiaceae	American Journal of Botany	89	5	865-874		http://www.amjbot.org/cgi/content/abstract/89/5/865	diversification; DNA; ITS; New Zealand; phylogeny; rbcL; Stylidiaceae	Phylogenetic analysis of ITS and rbcL sequences show that New Zealand Stylidiaceae fall into two distinct lineages differing in species richness. Each lineage represents a unique dispersal event to New Zealand occurring at different times during the evolutionary history of the family. One lineage comprises seven species of Forstera and Phyllachne, while the other consists solely of Oreostylidium subulatum. The origin of the Forstera/Phyllachne lineage in New Zealand is equivocal; either a South American or a Tasmanian origin is equally parsimonious. Possible sister groups are F. bellidifolia in Tasmania and P. uliginosa in South America. Oreostylidium subulatum has an Australian origin. In our analyses O. subulatum is nested in a clade composed entirely of species of Stylidium, almost all of which are endemic to Australia. Species of Phyllachne share a cushion habit with the outgroup Donatia (Donatiaceae) that may have preadapted them to alpine environments in New Zealand. The New Zealand Stylidiaceae have small, white, actinomorphic flowers that are well adapted to the unspecialized pollinator fauna. Forstera and Phyllachne share this trait with Donatia; however, the small, white flowers of Oreostylidium are a dramatic departure from the colorful, highly specialized flowers of Stylidium.
S1475	S. S. Aliscioni;L. M. Giussani;F. O. Zuloaga;E. A. Kellogg	2003	A molecular phylogeny of Panicum (Poaceae: Paniceae): Tests of monophyly and phylogenetic placement within the Panicoideae	American Journal of Botany	90	5	796-821				Panicum L. is a cosmopolitan genus with approximately 450 species. Although the genus has been considerably reduced in species number with the segregation of many taxa to independent genera in the last two centuries, Panicum remains a heterogeneous assemblage, as has been demonstrated in recent years. The genus is remarkably uniform in its floral characters but exhibits considerable variation in anatomical, physiological, and cytological features. As a result, several classifications, and criteria of what the genus should really include, have been postulated in modern literature. The purpose of this research, based on molecular data of the chloroplast ndhF gene, is to test the monophyly of Panicum, to evaluate infrageneric classifications, and to propose a robust phylogenetic hypothesis. Based on the present results, previous morphological and molecular phylogenetic studies, and inferred diagnostic morphological characters, we restrict Panicum s. s. (sensu stricto) to the former subgenus Panicum, and support recognition of Dichanthelium, Phanopyrum and Steinchisma as distinct genera. We have transfered other species of Panicum to other genera of the Paniceae. Most of the necessary combinations have been made previously, so few nomenclatural changes have been required. The remaining species of Panicum s. l. (sensu lato) are included within Panicum incertae sedis representing isolated species or species grouped within monophyletic clades. Additionally, we explore the performance of the three codon position characters in producing the supported phylogeny.
S996	A. M. Gottlieb;G. C. Giberti;L. Poggio	2003	Molecular analyses of the genus Ilex (Aquifoliaceae) in southern South America, evidence from AFLP and ITS sequence data	American Journal of Botany							Genetic relationships among 120 individuals, representing the seven native South American species of Ilex, were surveyed by amplified fragment length polymorphism (AFLP). Additionally, a phylogenetic analysis using sequences of internal transcribed spacer regions (ITS) of 35 further species, was accomplished through direct character optimization. Moreover, a sensitivity analysis was performed involving 15 indel-substitution models. Information derived from these analyses contributed to clarify the relationships among South American representatives of the genus. The Neighbor-joining clustering of AFLP markers rendered groupings that were in accordance with morphological identification of the accessions. Phylogenetic analysis revealed that ITS sequences of South American taxa were not monophyletic. Likewise, ITS sequences of both North American and Asian taxa were not monophyletic. In addition, the sensitivity analysis showed that the placement of several taxa was highly sensitive to parameter variation, whereas other taxa formed stable clades, which were associated according to their geographical origin. The AFLP phenogram and the consensus cladogram were remarkably congruent in that both demonstrate the existence of a group formed by I. brasiliensis, I. theezans, I. integerrima, I. brevicuspis and I. argentina, and that I. dumosa and I. paraguariensis were unrelated to the former group.
S1159	W. L. Clement;M. C. Tebbitt;L. L. Forrest;J. E. Blair;L. Brouillet;T. Eriksson;S. M. Swensen	2004	Phylogenetic position and biogeography of Hillebrandia sandwicensis (Begoniaceae): A rare Hawaiian relict	American Journal of Botany	91		905-917				The Begoniaceae consist of two genera, Begonia, with approximately 1400 species that are widely distributed in the tropics, and Hillebrandia, with one species that is endemic to the Hawaiian Islands and the only member of the family native to those islands. To help explain the history of Hillebrandia on the Hawaiian Archipelago, phylogenetic relationships of the Begoniaceae and the Cucurbitales were inferred using sequence data from 18S, rbcL, and ITS, and the minimal age of both Begonia and the Begoniaceae were indirectly estimated. The analyses strongly support the placement of Hillebrandia as the sister group to the rest of the Begoniaceae and indicate that the Hillebrandia lineage is at least 51ˆ65 million years old, an age that predates the current Hawaiian Islands by about 20 million years. Evidence that Hillebrandia sandwicensis has survived on the Hawaiian Archipelago by island hopping from older, now denuded islands to younger, more mountainous islands is presented. Various scenarios for the origin of ancestor to Hillebrandia are considered. The geographic origin of source populations unfortunately remains obscure; however, we suggest a boreotropic or a MalesianˆPacific origin is most likely. Hillebrandia represents the first example in the well-studied Hawaiian flora of a relict genus.
S1046	P. W. Fritsch;F. Almeda;S. S. Renner;A. B. Martins;B. C. Cruz	2004	Phylogeny and circumscription of the near-endemic Brazilian tribe Microlicieae (Melastomataceae)	American Journal of Botany							The members of tribe Microlicieae in the flowering plant family Melastomataceae are nearly all endemic to the cerrado biome of Brazil. Traditional classifications of the Melastomataceae have attributed between 15 and 17 genera to the Microlicieae, but subsequent revisions have circumscribed the tribe more narrowly. The monophyly and intergeneric relationships of the Microlicieae were evaluated through phylogenetic analyses with molecular and morphological data sets. Incorporation of DNA sequences from the intron of the chloroplast gene rpl16 into a previously generated family-wide data set yielded a clade comprising Chaetostoma, Lavoisiera, Microlicia, Rhynchanthera, Stenodon, and Trembleya (ìcore Microlicieaeî), with Rhynchanthera as the first-diverging lineage. The other four genera of Microlicieae sampled are placed in other clades: Eriocnema as sister to Miconieae; Siphanthera with Aciotis, Nepsera, and Acisanthera of Melastomeae; Castratella as sister to Monochaetum of Melastomeae; and Cambessedesia as part of an unresolved polytomy in a large clade that includes most Melastomataceae. Analyses of the chloroplast genes rbcL and ndhF that included three core genera produced similar results, as did the combined analysis of all three data sets. Combined parsimony analyses of DNA sequences from rpl16 and the nuclear ribosomal intercistronic transcribed spacer (ITS) region of 22 species of core Microlicieae yielded the topology (Trembleya (Chaetostoma (Stenodon (Microlicia, Lavoisiera)))) but with generally low internal support. Lavoisiera, recently redefined on the basis of several morphological characters, was strongly supported as monophyletic. A morphological phylogenetic analysis of the Microlicieae based on 10 parsimony-informative characters recovered a monophyletic core Microlicieae but provided no further resolution among genera. Penalized likelihood analysis with two calibration time windows produced an age estimate of 3.7 million years for the time of initial divergence of strictly Brazilian core Microlicieae. In general agreement with the estimated age of the most active stage of development of cerrado vegetation, this date implies an adaptive shift from hydric to seasonally dry habitats during the early evolution of this group.
S1194	R. A. Levin;K. Watson;L. Bohs	2004	A four gene study of evolutionary relationships in Solanum section Acanthophora	American Journal of Botany							The „spiny solanums‰, Solanum subgenus Leptostemonum (Solanaceae), comprise a large lineage with over 350 species, and include the cultivated eggplant, Solanum melongena. Despite the importance of this subgenus, phylogenetic relationships among these taxa are currently unclear. The present research contributes to this understanding while focusing on Solanum section Acanthophora, a group of ca. 19 species defined by the presence of simple hairs, rather than the stellate hairs common across the rest of subgenus Leptostemonum. In this study we inferred phylogenetic relationships among 29 Solanum taxa, including 14 species of section Acanthophora, using DNA sequence data from two nuclear regions [ITS and the granule-bound starch synthase gene (GBSSI or waxy)] and two chloroplast regions (trnT-trnF and trnS-trnG). This combination of gene regions resulted in a well resolved phylogenetic hypothesis, with results strongly suggesting that Solanum sect. Acanthophora is not monophyletic, although the majority of taxa comprise a monophyletic lineage that is sister to Solanum section Lasiocarpa. Of the four gene regions, waxy was especially useful for phylogenetic inference, with both a high percentage of parsimony-informative sites as well as a low level of homoplasy. Further studies in progress will help elucidate relationships of sect. Acanthophora to other members of subgenus Leptostemonum.
S1071	D. J. McLaughlin;R. W. J. Hanson;E. M. Frieders;E. C. Swann;L. J. Szabo	2004	Mitosis in the yeast phase of the basidiomycetes Bensingtonia yuccicola and Stilbum vulgare and its phylogenetic implications	American Journal of Botany	91						Phylogenetic studies of yeasts rely on an extensive molecular and biochemical data set, but structural characters are scarce. Details of mitosis in yeasts have been studied with transmission electron microscopy and immunofluorescence. Of these two methods immunofluorescence is faster and easier and yields sufficient detail for cytological comparisons. Only three basidiomyceteous yeasts have been studied thus far with immunofluorescence. Mitosis in budding cells of ascomycetous yeasts occurs in the parent, while in basidiomyceteous yeasts, except in Agaricostilbum pulcherrimum, it occurs in the bud. Mitosis in additional yeasts in the Agaricostilbomycetidae of the Urediniomycetes was observed using immunofluorescence localization of freeze-substituted material. In Stilbum vulgare, mitosis occurred in the parent, but in Bensingtonia yuccicola it occurred in the bud as in most other basidiomycetous yeasts. Stilbum vulgare also had predominantly binucleate yeast cells. Nuclear small subunit rDNA sequence data showed that A. pulcherrimum and S. vulgare are more closely related to each other than to B. yuccicola within the Agaricostilbomycetidae. Based on the few taxa examined, mitotic and cytoskeletal characters provide phylogenetic information.
S1034	J. B. Mols;B. Gravendeel;L. W. Chatrou;M. D. Pirie;P. C. Bygrave;M. W. Chase;P. J. A. Kefller	2004	Identifying clades in Asian Annonaceae: monophyletic genera in the polyphyletic Miliuseae	American Journal of Botany							The tribe Miliuseae (Annonaceae) comprises six genera distributed in Asia: Alphonsea, Mezzettia, Miliusa, Orophea, Platymitra, and Phoenicanthus. A phylogenetic study to investigate the putative monophyly of the tribe and the intergeneric relationships is presented here. Nucleotide sequences of the plastid gene rbcL, trnL intron and trnL-trnF intergenic spacer were analyzed from 114 Annonaceae taxa, including 24 Miliuseae species and two outgroups using maximum parsimony and Bayesian inference. The two data sets (rbcL and the trnL-trnF regions) were analyzed separately and in combination. Miliuseae were found to be polyphyletic due to the position of Mezzettia and are part of a large, predominantly Asian and Central-American clade (miliusoid clade). Although intergeneric relationships were poorly resolved, all genera, except Polyalthia, were monophyletic, supporting previous generic delimitation based on morphology. A group of three Polyalthia species seems the most likely sister group of Miliusa. Several infrageneric groups of Miliusa, Orophea, and Polyalthia are supported by both molecular and morphological data. No morphological synapomorphies have yet been found for the miliusoid clade. Molecular clades within the miliusoid clade, however, can be characterized by size and the shape of the outer petals, number of ovules per carpel, and the size of the fruits.
S1007	A. Weeks;B. B. Simpson	2004	Molecular genetic evidence for intraspecific hybridization among endemic Hispaniolan Bursera (Burseraceae)	American Journal of Botany							Historically, genetic introgression among species as well as hybrid origins for species of the diploid tree genus Bursera have been proposed based on the supposition that individuals that are morphologically intermediate between sympatric parent species must be derived from hybridization. Here we report the first molecular genetic evidence for both unidirectional and reciprocal interspecific hybridization within Bursera. Phylogenies of hybrids and other species in B. subgenus Bursera are reconstructed based on nuclear and chloroplast sequence data. Compelling evidence supports the hybrid origin of three endemic Hispaniolan species: B. brunea (B. nashii x B. simaruba), B. gracilipes (B. spinescens x B. simaruba) and B. ovata (B. simaruba x B. spinescens). Cloning studies of nuclear markers from B. ovata suggest that this species is an introgressed or later backcross generation hybrid and thus reproduces sexually.
S1453	M. F. Wojciechowski;M. Lavin;M. J. Sanderson	2004	A phylogeny of legumes (Leguminosae) based on analysis of the plastid matK gene resolves many well-supported subclades within the family	American Journal of Botany	91		1846-1862				Phylogenetic analysis of 330 plastid matK gene sequences, representing 235 genera from 37 of 39 tribes, and four outgroup taxa from eurosids I, supports many well-resolved subclades within the Leguminosae. These results are generally consistent with those derived from other plastid sequence data (rbcL and trnL), but show greater resolution and clade support overall. In particular, the monophyly of subfamily Papilionoideae and at least seven major subclades are well-supported by bootstrap and Bayesian credibility values. These subclades are informally recognized as the Cladrastis clade, genistoid sensu lato, dalbergioid sensu lato, mirbelioid, millettioid, and robinioid clades, and the inverted-repeat-lacking clade (IRLC). The genistoid clade is expanded to include genera such as Poecilanthe, Cyclolobium, Bowdichia, and Diplotropis, and thus contains the vast majority of papilionoids known to produce quinolizidine alkaloids. The dalbergioid clade is expanded to include the tribe Amorpheae. The mirbelioids include the tribes Bossiaeeae and Mirbelieae, with Hypocalypteae as its sister group. The millettioids comprise two major subclades that roughly correspond to the tribes Millettieae and Phaseoleae, and represent the only major papilionoid clade marked by a macromorphological apomorphy, pseudoracemose inflorescences. The robinioids are expanded to include Sesbania and members of the tribe Loteae. The IRLC, the most species-rich subclade, is sister to the robinioids. Analysis of the matK data consistently resolves but modestly supports a clade comprising papilionoid taxa that accumulate canavanine in the seeds. This suggests a single origin for the biosynthesis of this most commonly produced of the non-protein amino acids in legumes.
S1350	K. F. Chung;C. I. Peng;S. R. Downie;K. Spalik;B. A. Schaal	2005	Molecular systematics of the trans-Pacific alpine genus Oreomyrrhis (Apiaceae)- phylogenetic affinities and biogeography implications	American Journal of Botany							Alpine ecosystem is the only terrestrial biogeographic unit that is distributed globally. Studying phylogenetics of the plant species in this widespread ecosystem will provide insights into the historical biogeographic processes that have shaped the global biodiversity. The trans-Pacific disjunct alpine genus Oreomyrrhis (Apiaceae) was investigated using nuclear rDNA ITS sequences to test the taxonomic and biogeographic hypotheses. Phylogenetic analyses using maximum parsimony, maximum likelihood, and Bayesian inference revealed that species of Oreomyrrhis form a weakly supported monophyletic clade that is nested within Chaerophyllum sect. Chaerophyllum (subtribe Scandicinae, tribe Scandiceae). The optimal solutions of dispersal-vicariance analysis indicate that the ancestor of Chaerophyllum sect. Chaerophyllum (including Oreomyrrhis) was distributed in Eurasia and subsequently dispersed to North America and southern Pacific Rim. Dating using ITS sequence variation suggests that these dispersal events were recent, probably during late Tertiary to Quaternary. The structure of the ITS haplotype network suggests that a rapid range expansion via long-distance dispersal had been crucial in generating the trans-Pacific disjunction of Oreomyrrhis. Furthermore, evolution toward smaller mericarp size, reduction in chromosome number, and a transition from outcrossing to selfing during Oreomyrrhis¡œs evolution might have increased the chances to long-distance dispersal, facilitating its range expansion and occupation on alpine environments.
S1327	E. J. Edwards;R. Nyffeler;M. J. Donoghue	2005	Basal cactus phylogeny: Pereskia paraphyly and implications for early cactus evolution	American Journal of Botany	92		1177-1188				The cacti are well-known desert plants, widely recognized by their specialized growth form and essentially leafless condition. Pereskia, a group of 17 species with regular leaf development and function, is generally viewed as representing the „ancestral cactus,‰ though its placement within Cactaceae has remained uncertain. Here we present a new hypothesis of phylogenetic relationships at the base of the Cactaceae, inferred from DNA sequence data from five gene regions representing all three plant genomes. Our data support a basal split in Cactaceae between a clade of eight Pereskia species, centered around the Caribbean basin, and all other cacti. Two other Pereskia clades, distributed mostly in the southern half of South America, are part of a major clade comprising Maihuenia plus Cactoideae, and Opuntioideae. This result highlights several events in the early evolution of the cacti. First, during the transition to stem-based photosynthesis, the evolution of stem stomata and delayed bark formation preceded the evolution of the stem cortex into a specialized photosynthetic tissue system. Second, the basal split in cacti separates a northern from an initially southern cactus clade, and the major cactus lineages probably originated in southern or west-central South America.
S1375	S. Oh;D. Potter	2005	Molecular phylogenetic systematics and biogeography of tribe Neillieae (Rosaceae) using DNA sequennces of cpDNA, rDNA, and LEAFy	American Journal of Botany	92		179-192				A phylogeny of the tribe Neillieae (Rosaceae), which comprises Neillia, Stephanandra, and Physocarpus, was reconstructed based on nucleotide sequences of several regions of cpDNA, the ITS and ETS regions of rDNA, and the second intron of LEAFY, to elucidate relationships among genera and species in Neillieae and to assess the historical biogeography of the tribe. Phylogenetic analyses indicated that Physocarpus and Neillia-Stephanandra were strongly supported as monophyletic and suggested that Stephanandra may have originated by hybridization between two lineages of Neillia. Dispersal-vicariance analyses suggested that the most recent common ancestor of Neillieae may have occupied eastern Asia and western North America and that Physocarpus and Neillia-Stephanandra may have been split by an intercontinental vicariance event in the early Miocene. The biogeographic analyses also suggested that species of Neillia and Stephanandra diversified in eastern Asia, whereas in Physocarpus one dispersal event from western North America to eastern Asia occurred. Two divergent types of LEAFY sequences were found in the eastern North American species, P. opulifolius, but only one type was present in each plant. The two types of sequences may represent homeologous genes that originated by hybridization between P. capitatus and P. monogynus, both western North American species.
S1305	Z. Wang;M. Binder;D. S. Hibbett	2005	Aquatic discomycetes Mitrula (Helotiales, Ascomycota): life history and systematics based on cultural, morphological and molecular studies	American Journal of Botany							Abstract: Mitrula species represent a group of aquatic discomycetes with an uncertain position in the Helotiales and an unknown life history. In this study, the life history and phylogenetic relationships of Mitrula were studied using a combination of cultural, morphological, and molecular techniques. Pure colonies were isolated from spores of Mitrula ascomata, conidiospores of Mitrula elegans were produced in vitro. Herbarium materials of Mitrula species from Europe, Asia, and North America were studied. Sequences of rDNA, including partial ssu-rDNA, lsu-rDNA and ITS, were used for inferring phylogenetic relationships both within Mitrula and between Mitrula and other inoperculate discomycetes. Special attention was given to possible relationships with fungi that resemble Mitrula in morphology. Equally-weighted parsimony analyses, likelihood analyses under GTR+G+I model, constrained analyses and Bayesian analyses were performed. Results suggest that 1) Four lineages can be recognized in Mitrula based on molecular data and morphological, and Mitrula elegans - Mitrula paludosa species complex is not monophyletic; 2) A close relationships between Mitrula and either Geoglossaceae or Sclerotiniaceae is not supported; 3) Mitrula belongs to a clade within the Helotiales that also includes the aero-aquatic genera, Cudoniella, Hydrocina, Vibrissea, Ombrophila, and Hymenoscyphus.
S1322	R. A. Levin;N. R. Myers;L. Bohs	2006	Evolutionary relationships among the "spiny solanums" (Solanum subgenus Leptostemonum)	American Journal of Botany	93		157-169				Species of Solanum subgenus Leptostemonum comprise almost one third of the genus and are distributed worldwide. Members of this group are defined by their sharp epidermal prickles, thus being commonly referred to as the „spiny solanums‰. This subgenus includes a number of economically important species such as the Old World eggplants, as well as locally cultivated New World species such as the naranjilla and cocona. Given the size and importance of this group we have examined phylogenetic relationships across subgenus Leptostemonum, including a large sampling of species from previously defined species groups within the subgenus. Evolutionary relationships were inferred using DNA sequence data from two nuclear regions [ITS and the granule-bound starch synthase gene (GBSSI or waxy)] and one chloroplast spacer region (trnS-trnG). Results suggest that Solanum subgenus Leptostemonum is monophyletic when the S. wendlandii and S. nemorense species groups are excluded. We have defined 10 well supported clades within subgenus Leptostemonum, some of which correspond to previously circumscribed species groups or sections. Most of the Old World species of subgenus Leptostemonum belong to a single species-rich clade. Spines and/or stellate hairs evolved more than once in Solanum, and floral heterandry originated multiple times within the „spiny solanums‰.
S1578	V. Malécot;T. Marcussen;J. Munzinger;R. Yockteng;M. Henry	2006	On the origin of the sweet-smelling parma violets cultivars (Violaceae): Wide intraspecific hybridization, sterility and sexual reproduction	American Journal of Botany							Parma Violets are reputed for their double, fragrant flowers and have been cultivated for centuries in Europe. However, due to a rather deviant morphology their taxonomic affinity has not been clarified. Authors have proposed an origin from three possible species, Viola alba, V. odorata or V. suavis, or a hybrid origin. We have generated and analyzed two independent data sets for several Parma Violet cultivars and numerous accessions of related taxa, the first one based on ITS sequence variation, and the second on allozymic variation in 14 putative loci. Both data sets showed that the Parma Violet cultivars have their origin within Viola alba and that they are best included in the Mediterranean ssp. dehnhardtii. There was no trace of interspecific hybridization. However, the cultivars appeared to have a single origin in a wide hybrid within V. alba, involving parental plants from the eastern and western Mediterranean region; historical literature sources seem to indicate Turkey and Italy, respectively. The investigated Parma Violet cultivars possessed high levels of allozyme heterozygosity, and to some extent also within-individual ITS sequence variation. Losses of heterozygosity and within- individual ITS sequence variation in some of the cultivars indicate subsequent rare events of sexual reproduction, presumably through cleistogamous seed-set.
S1529	M. J. Moore;A. Tye;R. K. Jansen	2006	Patterns of long-distance dispersal in Tiquilia subg. Tiquilia (Boraginaceae): implications for the origins of amphitropical disjuncts and Galapagos Islands endemics	American Journal of Botany							Plant biogeographers have long argued whether plant disjunctions result from vicariance or dispersal. One of the classic patterns of plant disjunction involves New World amphitropical disjuncts, as exemplified by Tiquilia subg. Tiquilia (Boraginaceae). Subgenus Tiquilia forms a heterogeneous group of ~20 species that is amphitropically distributed in the deserts of North and South America, with four taxa endemic to the GalΩpagos Islands. The current study reconstructs the biogeographic history of subg. Tiquilia in order to explore the origins of New World amphitropical disjunction and of GalΩpagos endemism. A strongly supported phylogeny of the subgenus is estimated using sequence data from matK, ndhF, rps16, ITS, and waxy. Biogeographic analyses using combined and individual marker data sets reveal a complex history of long-distance dispersal in subg. Tiquilia. Biogeographic reconstructions imply a North American origin of the subgenus and its three major lineages, and require at least four long-distance dispersal events to explain its current distribution. The South American taxa of subg. Tiquilia result from three independent and nonsimultaneous colonization events, while the monophyly and continental origins of the GalΩpagos endemics are unresolved. This study contributes to a growing body of evidence that intercontinental dispersal has been more common than previously realized.
S1610	S. A. Mori;C. H. Tsou;C. C. Wu;B. Cronholm;A. A. Anderberg	2006	Evolution of Lecythidaceae with an emphasis on the circumscription of neotropical genera. Information from combined ndhf and trnl-f sequence data	American Journal of Botany							The Lecythidaceae comprise a pantropical family best known for the edible seeds of the Brazil nut (Bertholletia excelsa) and the cannon-ball tree (Couroupita guianensis) which is planted as a botanical curiosity in subtropical and tropical gardens. In addition, species of the family are often among the most common in Neotropical forests, especially in the Amazon Basin. We used combined datasets derived from the ndhF and trnL-F genes to elucidate relationships of genera in both the Old and New Worlds that have been associated with Lecythidaceae. Our work agrees with the recognition of the Napoleonaeaceae, Scytopetalaceae, and Lecythidaceae as separate families. Within the Lecythidaceae there is support for recognizing the following three subfamilies: Foetidioideae, Planchonioideae, and Lecythidoideae. We then focused on genera of the latter subfamily and found support for recognizing Grias, Gustavia, Corythophora, Couratari, Couroupita; but conclude that Allantoma, Cariniana, Lecythis, and Eschweilera were not monoyphyletic. Because the position of Bertholletia excelsa in relation to the other zygomorphic-flowered genera was not resolved, we are not able to comment on its generic status.
S1499	M. V. Norup;J. Dransfield;M. W. Chase;A. S. Barfod;E. S. Fernando;W. J. Baker	2006	Homoplasious character combinations and generic delimitation: a case study from the Indo-Pacific arecoid palms (Arecaceae: Areceae)	American Journal of Botany							The Indo-Pacific palm tribe Areceae (Arecaceae; Arecoideae) exhibits complex distributions of morphological character states that are potentially challenging for the delimitation of its genera. In the first exhaustive sampling of all 65 genera of the Areceae, we examined relationships of two problematic genera, Heterospathe and Rhopaloblaste, using portions of the low-copy nuclear genes phosphoribulokinase (PRK) and RNA-polymerase II subunit B (RPB2). Both Heterospathe and Rhopaloblaste fell within a highly supported IPP clade, but are clearly unrelated. Rhopaloblaste was strongly supported as monophyletic and is most closely related to Indian Ocean genera. Heterospathe was resolved with strong support within a clade of western Pacific genera, but with the monotypic Alsmithia nested within it. Ptychosperma micranthum, which has previously been included in both Heterospathe and Rhopaloblaste, is excluded from all three genera in which it has previously been placed, but its relations to other genera are unresolved. Morphological comparisons indicate that the crownshaft is putatively synapomorphic for the IPP clade with numerous reversals within the clade and some independent origins elsewhere. The putative diagnostic characters of Heterospathe show high levels of homoplasy, and the genus can only be distinguished by a suite of characters, whereas Rhopaloblaste is more clearly defined. Our results have implications not only for the two genera in focus, but also for the classification of Areceae in general.
S1498	S. D. Smith;D. A. Baum	2006	Phylogenetics of the florally-diverse Andean clade Iochrominae (Solanaceae)	American Journal of Botany							Recent molecular phylogenetic studies of Solanaceae have identified many well-supported clades within the family, and have permitted the creation of a phylogenetic system of classification. Here we estimate the phylogeny for Iochrominae, a clade of Physaleae sensu Olmstead et al. (1999), which contains 34 Andean species encompassing an immense diversity of floral forms and colors. Using three nuclear regions, ITS, the second intron of LEAFY and exons 2 to 9 of the granule-bound starch synthase gene (waxy), we evaluate the monophyly of the traditional genera comprising Iochrominae, and we assess the extent of interspecific hybridization within the clade. Our results showed only one of the six traditionally recognized genera of Iochrominae to be monophyletic. Further, comparison of the individual nuclear datasets revealed two interspecific hybrid taxa and a third possible case. We note that these hybrid taxa occur in the Amotape-Huancabamba zone, a region between the Northern and Central Andes that has the greatest diversity of Iochroma species and offers frequent opportunities for hybridization in areas of sympatry. We postulate that periodic hybridization events, such as those documented in our study, coupled with pollinator-mediated selection and the potential for microallopatry in montane Andean habitats may have promoted the diversification of floral form and color observed in Iochrominae.
S1469	K. Spalik;S. R. Downie	2006	The evolutionary history of Sium sensu lato (Apiaceae): dispersal, vicariance, and domestication as inferred from ITS rDNA phylogeny	American Journal of Botany							The biogeographic history of Sium sensu lato (s.l.) (including Sium sensu stricto[s.s.], Afrocarum, and Berula) was inferred using a nuclear rDNA ITS sequence phylogeny and dispersalˆvicariance analysis. One hundred accessions were analyzed, including 86 specimens of Sium s.l., representing all taxa throughout their geographical range. The phylogenetic analyses showed that Afrocarum and the African and St. Helena species of Sium were nested within Berula forming the Berula s.l. clade. The remaining species of Sium constituted a weakly supported Sium s.s. clade. The cultivated S. sisarum is closely related to the west Asian S. sisaroideum. The divergence of Sium s.s. from Berula s.l., estimated under the assumption of a molecular clock and using a substitution rate of 0.61% per million years, took place around 10.4 million years ago. Dispersalˆvicariance analysis suggested that the biogeographic pattern of this group resulted from simple vicariance and eventual migration to adjacent areas rather than from long-distance dispersal. The ancestral area of Sium s.l. was probably western Palearctic. The dispersal of Berula to North America occurred ca. 3 million years ago, possibly by island hopping. The migration of S. suave to North America took place ca 0.6 million years ago through Beringia.
S1801	W. B. Zomlefer;W. M. Whitten;N. H. Williams;W. S. Judd	2006	Infrageneric phylogeny of Schoenocaulon (Liliales: Melanthiaceae) with clarification of cryptic species based on ITS sequence data and geographical distribution	American Journal of Botany	93		1178-1192				As currently defined, the 24 species of Schoenocaulon occur in three disjunct areas: north central Florida (one species, S. dubium), southern Peru (portion of the range of S. officinale), and the region from southeastern New MexicoˆTexas south to Venezuela; the 20 species endemic to Mexico are geographically restricted. Species delimitations, often based on tepal morphology, have been problematic. Our analyses of ITS sequence data for all 27 species and infraspecific taxa support recognition of two new species and recircumscription and placement of elements of the polyphyletic S. ghiesbreghtii and S. mortonii complexes. For taxa with adequate sampling, our data also indicate 11 to 12 cladospecies and three to six metaspecies according to the apomorphic species concept. The resolved phylogeny, correlated with geography and morphology, allows insight into biogeographical diversification and the evolution of some unusual morphological characters within the genus, such as nectary differentiation and tepal margin type. Broader impacts: This study will be of interest to a wide variety of scientists, for example: those interested in the systematics of Liliales, in the flora of Mexico (and the southern United States), in speciation and the application of species concepts (especially in phylogenetic species approaches), and in phytogeographical patterns. The study also demonstrates the value of DNA sequences at the species level in clarifying species relationships.
S1797	A. G. Ghebretinsae;M. Thulin;J. C. Barber	2007	Relationships of Cucumbers and Melons Unravelled- Molecular Phylogenetics of Cucumis and Related Genera (Benincaseae, Cucurbitaceae)	American Journal of Botany							Cucumis L. (Cucurbitaceae) comprises 33 species of annuals and perennials with a major native center of diversity in tropical and southern Africa. The genus includes some economically important and widely grown vegetables such as cucumbers and melons. Monophyly of the genus has been disputed in previous studies, but with only limited sampling. Relationships within Cucumis are thus poorly understood; moreover, the validity of the closely related genera has not been thoroughly tested. The present study was undertaken to test the monophyly of Cucumis and several closely related genera, test sectional circumscriptions within Cucumis, and to understand the biogeographical history of the genus. We sequenced the nuclear ITS and plastid trnS-trnG regions for 40 ingroup and three outgroup taxa, representing all recognized subgenera and sections. Parsimony, maximum likelihood and Bayesian analyses found Cucumella, Oreosyce, Mukia, Myrmecosicyos and Dicaelospermum nested within Cucumis. The clades recovered within the Cucumis complex in some instances represent the first phylogenetically-derived hypothesis of relationships, whereas others correspond to previous subgeneric and sectional classifications. At least four introductions from Africa to Asia, as well as one re-introduction to Africa, are suggested within the Cucumis complex. Cucumis sativus (cucumber) is strongly supported as sister to the eastern Asian C. hystrix, whereas C. melo (melon) is strongly supported as sister to C. sagittatus in southern Africa.
S1931	K. Marlowe;L. Hufford	2007	Evolution of Synthyris sect. Dissecta (Plantaginaceae) on Northern Rocky Mountain sky islands	American Journal of Botany							We examine phylogeography of Synthyris sect. Dissecta (Plantaginaceae), which is restricted to the Olympic (S. lanuginosa) and Northern Rocky Mountains (S. dissecta and S. canbyi), to infer effects of sky islands and modes of speciation. Sequences of cpDNA trnT-trnL and psbA-trnH intergenic spacers resolved 22 haplotypes among 302 individuals sampled from 16 populations of the three species. Broad gene flow in the ancestral lineage and subsequent random capture of haplotypes in species lineages of sect. Dissecta have resulted in haplotype clades that are not exclusive to species. Allopatric fragmentation separated Olympic and Northern Rocky Mountain populations, giving rise to the Olympic endemic S. lanuginosa, which is characterized by unique haplotypes consistent with long temporal isolation. Low haplotype and nucleotide diversity in S. canbyi are consistent with newly founded populations experiencing a population bottleneck. We infer S. canbyi evolved as a northern peripheral isolate of S. dissecta. Nested clade analysis indicated limited migration in S. dissecta with possible isolation by distance. Populations of this species appear to have been isolated not only on interglacial sky islands, but also during at least the last glaciation when valley glaciers prevented gene flow among populations in different ranges of the Northern Rocky Mountains.
S1744	C. M. Ritz;L. Martins;R. Mecklenburg;V. Goremykin;F. H. Hellwig	2007	The molecular phylogeny of Rebutia (Cactaceae) and its allies demonstrates the influence of paleogeography on the evolution of South American mountain cacti	American Journal of Botany	94	8	1321-1332				This study explores the phylogenetic relationships of the most popular South American cacti classified in Browningieae, Cereeae and Trichocereeae. We sequenced three non-coding chloroplast markers: the 5‚ region of the atpB-rbcL intergenic spacer (IGS), the trnL-trnF IGS and the trnK-rps16 IGS including a portion of the 5‚ end of the trnK gene. The phylogenetic reconstructions based on parsimony and Bayesian approaches clearly show that the large genera Rebutia s.l. and Echinopsis s.l. are polyphyletic. In the case of Rebutia s.s. the very narrow delimitation by Backeberg turns out to be in good correspondence with our results. The results further suggest the unification of the genera Sulcorebutia and Weingartia. The cephalia-bearing columnar cacti with naked pericarpels form a strongly supported clade. The genus Espostoa which also develops characteristic lateral cephalia but has hairy pericarpels is not included in this clade, instead, it is more closely related to non-cephalia-bearing Trichocereeae (Haageocereus, Matucana and others). Biogeographical patterns are congruent with the molecular phylogeny, as the cephalia-bearing cacti with naked pericarpels are centered in north-eastern Brazil, whereas almost all other species investigated in this study are distributed in the Andes. We hypothesize that the evolution of South American mountain cacti is influenced by the Andean uplift and the formation of intracontinental marine basins. This study contributes to a better understanding of how species richness evolved in of one of the world‚s hotspots of biodiversity.
S1935	R. P. Shefferson;T. Kull;K. Tali	2007	Mycorrhizal interactions of orchids colonizing Estonian mine tailings hills	American Journal of Botany							Northeastern Estonia is home to extensive oil shale mines. Associated with these are desolate and environmentally damaging hills of ash tailings. Interestingly, some of the first plants to colonize these hills are rare orchids. Here, we assess the identities of the fungi mycorrhizal with these orchids, in particular Epipactis atrorubens, Orchis militaris, and Dactylorhiza baltica, and compare them with mycorrhizal interactions from orchids from pristine habitat. Epipactis atrorubens associated with the widest breadth of fungi, including unnamed members of the basidiomycete family Tulasnellaceae and the potentially ectomycorrhizal ascomycetes Trichophaea woolhopeia and Geopora cooperi. Orchis militaris also associated with unnamed members of the Tulasnellaceae. Dactylorhiza baltica associated with Ceratobasidium albasitensis. In Epipactis and Orchis, the same fungi associated with plants in pristine habitat as with those on ash hills. The tulasnelloid and ceratobasidioid fungi mycorrhizal with these orchids appear closely related to common orchid mycorrhizal fungi, while one of the ascomycetes mycorrhizal with Epipactis atrorubens is closely related to a fungus mycorrhizal with Epipactis microphylla. We suggest further research to assess whether mycorrhizal fungi provide orchids with greater tolerance to potentially toxic soil conditions, thus aiding in primary succession.
S1934	W. M. Whitten;M. A. Blanco;N. H. Williams;S. Koehler;G. Carnevali;R. B. Singer;L. Endara;K. M. Neubig	2007	Molecular phylogenetics of Maxillaria and related genera (Orchidaceae: Cymbidieae) based upon combined molecular data sets	American Journal of Botany	94	1	1860-1889				The orchid genus Maxillaria is one of the largest and most common of neotropical orchid genera, but its current generic boundaries and relationships have long been regarded as artificial. Phylogenetic relationships within subtribe Maxillariinae sensu Dressler (1993) with emphasis on Maxillaria s.l. were inferred using parsimony analyses of individual and combined DNA sequence data. We analyzed a combined matrix of nrITS DNA, the plastid matK gene and flanking trnK intron, and the plastid atpB-rbcL intergenic spacer for 619 individuals representing ca. 354 species. The plastid rpoC1 gene (ca. 2600 bp) was sequenced for 84 selected species and combined in a more limited analysis with the other data sets to provide greater resolution. A well-resolved and supported consensus was found, for which most clades were present in more than one individual analysis. All the currently recognized minor genera of „core‰ Maxillariinae (Anthosiphon, Chrysocycnis, Cryptocentrum, Cyrtidiorchis, Mormolyca, Pityphyllum, and Trigonidium) are embedded within a polyphyletic Maxillaria s.l. Our results support the recognition of a more restricted Maxillaria, of some previously published segregate genera (Brasiliorchis, Camaridium, Christensonella, Heterotaxis, Ornithidium, Sauvetrea), and of several novel clades at the generic level. These revised monophyletic generic concepts should minimize further nomenclatural changes, encourage monographic studies, and facilitate more focused analyses of character evolution within Maxillariinae.
S2106	M. A. Beilstein;I. A. Al-Shehbaz;S. Mathews;E. A. Kellogg	2008	Brassicaceae phylogeny inferred from phytochrome A and ndhF sequence data: tribes and trichomes revisited	American Journal of Botany							The family Brassicaceae comprises 3710 species in 338 genera, 25 recently delimited tribes, and three major lineages based on phylogenetic results from the chloroplast gene ndhF. To assess the credibility of the lineages and newly delimited tribes, we sequenced an approximately 1.8 kb region of the nuclear phytochrome A (PHYA) gene for taxa previously sampled for the chloroplast gene ndhF. Using parsimony, likelihood and Bayesian methods, we reconstructed the phylogeny of the gene and used the Approximately Unbiased (AU) test to compare phylogenetic results from PHYA with findings from ndhF. We also combined ndhF and PHYA data and used a Bayesian mixed model approach to infer phylogeny. PHYA and combined analyses recover the same three large lineages as those recovered in ndhF trees, increasing confidence in these lineages. The combined tree confirms the monophyly of most of the recently delimited tribes (only Alysseae, Anchonieae, and Descuraineae are not monophyletic), while 13 of the 23 sampled tribes are monophyletic in PHYA trees. In addition to phylogenetic results, we documented trichome branching pattern from species across the phylogeny and explored the evolution of different trichome morphologies using the AU tests. Our results indicate that dendritic, medifixed, and stellate trichomes likely evolved independently several times in the Brassicaceae.
S2080	L. I. Cabrera;G. A. Salazar;M. W. Chase;S. J. Mayo;J. Bogner;P. Davila	2008	Phylogenetic relationships of aroids and duckweeds (Araceae) inferred from coding and non-coding plastid DNA	American Journal of Botany	95		1153-1165	10.3732/ajb.0800073			Familial, subfamilial, and tribal monophyly and relationships of aroids and duckweeds were assessed by parsimony and Bayesian phylogenetic analyses of five regions of coding (rbcL, matK) and non-coding plastid DNA (partial trnK intron, trnL intron, trnLˆtrnF spacer) for exemplars of nearly all aroid and duckweed genera. Our analyses confirm the position of Lemna and its allies (formerly Lemnaceae) within Araceae as the well-supported sister group of all the aroids except Gymnostachydoideae and Orontioideae. The last two subfamilies form the sister clade of the rest of the family. Monophyly of subfamilies Orontioideae, Pothoideae, Monsteroideae, and Lasioideae is supported, but Aroideae are paraphyletic if Calla is maintained in its own subfamily (Calloideae). Our results suggest expansion of the recently proposed subfamily Zamioculcadoideae (Zamioculcas, Gonatopus) to include Stylochaeton and identify problems in the current delimitation of tribes Anadendreae, Heteropsideae, and Monstereae (Monsteroideae), Caladieae/Zomicarpeae, and Colocasieae (Aroideae). Canalization of traits of the spathe and spadix considered typical of Araceae evolved after the split of Gymnostachydoideae, Orontioideae, and Lemnoideae. An association with aquatic habitats is a plesiomorphic attribute in Araceae, occurring in the helophytic Orontioideae and free-floating Lemnoideae, but evolving independently in various derived aroid lineages including free-floating Pistia (Aroideae).
S2024	W. J. M. Koopman;V. Wissemann;K. D. Cock;J. V. Huylenbroeck;J. D. Riek;G. J. H. Sabatino;D. Visser;B. Vosman;C. M. Ritz;B. Maes;G. Werlemark;H. Nybom;T. Debener;M. Linde;M. J. M. Smulders	2008	AFLP Markers as a Tool to Reconstruct Complex Relationships: A Case Study in Rosa (Rosaceae)	American Journal of Botany	95	3	353-366				The genus Rosa has a complex evolutionary history caused by several factors, often in conjunction: extensive hybridization, recent radiation, incomplete lineage sorting, and multiple events of polyploidy. We examined the applicability of AFLP markers for reconstructing (species) relationships in Rosa, using UPGMA clustering, Wagner parsimony, and Bayesian inference. All trees were well-resolved, but many of the deeper branches were weakly supported. The cluster analysis showed that the rose cultivars can be separated into a "European" and an "Oriental" cluster, each being related to different wild species. The phylogenetic analyses showed that 1) two of the four subgenera (Hulthemia and Platyrhodon) do not deserve subgeneric status; 2) section Carolinae should be merged with sect. Cinnamomeae; 3) subsection Rubigineae is a monophyletic group within sect. Caninae, making sect. Caninae paraphyletic; 4) there is little support for the distinction of the five other subsections within sect. Caninae. Comparison of the trees with morphological classifications and with previous molecular studies showed that all methods yielded reliable trees. Bayesian inference proved to be a useful alternative to parsimony analysis of AFLP data. Because of their genome-wide sampling, AFLPs are the markers of choice to reconstruct (species) relationships in evolutionary complex groups.
S2053	J. D. Lawrey;P. Diederich;M. Sikaroodi;P. M. Gillevet	2008	Remarkable nutritional diversity of basidiomycetes in the Corticiales, including a new foliicolous species of Marchandiomyces (anamorphic Basidiomycota, Corticiaceae) from Australia	American Journal of Botany	95						Fungi in the basidiomycete order Corticiales are remarkably diverse nutritionally, including a variety of saprotrophs, plant and fungal pathogens, and lichen-forming fungi. Understanding the origin of this diversity depends on a clearer elucidation of the phylogenetic relationships of fungi in the order. One of its core members is the genus Marchandiomyces, originally established for lichen pathogens that form orange or coral-colored bulbils. We describe here a new species in the genus, M. marsonii sp. nov., which is unusual in its appearance, habit and geographic provenance. It is foliicolous on leaves of Pandanus (Screw pines, Pandanaceae) and produces flattened, coral-colored bulbils resembling apothecia of the ascomycete genus Orbilia. It is also the first member of the genus to be collected from Australia. An isolate of the new fungus, and several additional cultures of related fungi, were obtained and investigated phylogenetically using parsimony, likelihood and Bayesian analyses of nuclear small and large subunit ribosomal sequences. Our phylogeny makes clear that Marchandiomyces species and their close relatives contribute significantly to the ecological diversity of the Corticiales, which is apparently derived mainly from lignicolous ancestors.
S2076	L. A. McDade;T. F. Daniel;C. A. Kiel	2008	Towards a comprehensive understanding of phylogenetic relationships among lineages of Acanthaceae s.l. (Lamiales)	American Journal of Botany							The large (ca. 4000 species), pan-tropical and subtropical family Acanthacaee (Asteridae: Lamiales) encompasses a rich range of morphological diversity, habitat preferences and biogeographic patterns. This is the first phylogenetic study to include representatives of all known lineages of Acanthaceae. Also included were all but xx genera whose relationships have remained enigmatic despite recent advances in delimiting major lineages of acanths. Results place all of the newly sampled taxa with strong support, notably expanding our understanding of Whitfieldieae and Barlerieae where most of the newly treated genera are placed. Almost all aspects of the phylogenetic framework of Acanthaceae are resolved with extremely strong support, including placement of Andrographideae sister to Barlerieae and inclusion of the black mangroves Avicennia in the family. However, banch support for the region of the phylogeny proximate to Lankesteria and Neuracanthus is weak (although both of these genera are strongly supported as monophyletic). This study provides a foundation for future phylogenetic and comparative work, informing lineage choice and sampling strategy while also pointing to aspects of relationship that require further phylogenetic study.
S2016	A. J. Shaw;S. Boles;B. Shaw	2008	A phylogenetic delimitation of the "Sphagnum subsecundum complex" (Sphagnaceae, Bryophyta)	American Journal of Botany							A seemingly obvious but sometimes overlooked premise of any evolutionary analysis is delineating the group of taxa under study. This is especially problematic in some bryophyte groups because of morphological simplicity and convergence. This research applies information from nucleotide sequences for eight plastid and nuclear loci to delineate a group of Northern Hemisphere peat moss species, the so-called Sphagnum subsecundum complex, which includes species known to be gametophytically haploid or diploid (i.e. sporophytically diploid-tetraploid). Despite the fact that S. subsecundum and several species in the complex have been attributed disjunct ranges that include all major continents, phylogenetic analyses suggest that the group is actually restricted to Europe and eastern North America. Plants from western North America, from California to Alaska, which are morphologically similar to species of the S. subsecundum complex in eastern N. America and Europe, actually belong to a different deep clade within Sphagnum section Subsecunda. One species often considered part of the S. subsecundum complex, S. contortum, likely has a reticulate history involving species in the two deepest clades within section Subsecunda. Nucleotide sequences show strong geographic structure across the section Subsecunda, but shallow tip clades suggest repeated long distance dispersal in the the section as well.
S2158	B. M. Torke;B. A. Schaal	2008	Molecular phylogenetics of the species-rich neotropical genus Swartzia (Leguminosae-Papilionoideae) and related genera of the swartzioid clade	American Journal of Botany	95	2	215-228				Swartzia (ca. 180 spp.) is a characteristic and diverse element of neotropical rainforest tree communities. As such, it has been identified as a focal group in studies of evolutionary diversification and community assembly in rainforests. However, progress is impeded by the lack of a phylogenetic hypothesis for the genus and its close relatives, which together constitute the descendents of one of the first branches of the papilionoid phylogeny. Here we present a molecular phylogenetic study with extensive sampling of species of Swartzia and with complete sampling of genera of the "swartzioid" clade. The results, based on analysis of chloroplast (atpBˆrbcL, trnL intron, and trnLˆF) and nuclear (AAT1 and ITS) DNA sequences, add substantially to our understanding of relationships within this diverse group and call for taxonomic changes, particularly within Swartzia. The monophyly of a redefined Swartzia is weakly to moderately supported. Within Swartzia, the analyses identify 11 non-overlapping subclades, few of which correspond exactly to previously published taxa. The analyses support the recent segregations of Bobgunnia from Swartzia and of Trischidium from Bocoa, as well as the resurrection of the monospecific genus Fairchildia. The analyses identify a "core swartzioid" clade comprising the remainder of Swartzia, Bocoa, and Candolleodendron.
S2095	R. Vidal-Russell;D. L. Nickrent	2008	Evolutionary Relationships in the Showy Mistletoe Family (Loranthaceae)	American Journal of Botany							Loranthaceae, with 73 genera and ca. 900 species, comprises mostly aerial hemiparasitic plants. Three monotypic genera considered to be relicts in the family are root parasites. The family is diverse in tropical areas worldwide, but representatives are also found in temperate habitats in the Old and New World. Previous classifications were based on floral and inflorescence morphology, karyological information and biogeography. The family has been divided into three tribes: Nuytsiae, Elytrantheae (subtribes Elytranthinae and Gaiadendrinae), and Lorantheae (subtribes Loranthinae and Psittacanthinae). Tribes Nuytsiae and Elytrantheae are characterized by a base chromosome number of X=12 whereas subtribe Loranthinae (X=9) and subtribe Psittacanthinae (X=8) numbers are derived via aneuploid reduction. To elucidate the phylogeny of the family, sequences from five genes (nuclear small and large subunit rDNA and the chloroplast genes rbcL, matK, and trnL-F) representing most genera were analyzed, each gene individually and as a concatenated data set, with maximum parsimony, likelihood and Bayesian inference. The three root parasites, Nuytsia, Atkinsonia and Gaiadendron, are supported as successive sister taxa to the remaining genera, resulting in a monophyletic group of aerial parasites. Three major clades are resolved each corresponding to a subtribe. However, two South American genera (Tristerix and Notanthera) and the New Zealand genus Tupeia, which were previously classified in subtribe Elytranthinae, are weakly supported as part of a clade representing the South American subtribe Psittacanthinae.
S2057	K. Watanabe;T. Ohi-Toma;J. Murata	2008	Multiple hybridization in the Aristolochia kaempferi group (Aristolochiaceae): evidence from reproductive isolation and molecular phylogeny	American Journal of Botany							Hybridization via distributional changes should be an important factor for plant speciation. Previous cpDNA analyses of the Aristolochia kaempferi group showed a distinct phylogeographic structure resulting from distributional changes brought about by paleo-climatic oscillations. However, the cpDNA phylogeny was incongruent with morphologically defined six taxa. To explore the evolutionary processes responsible for the inconsistency between cpDNA and morphology, artificial crossings and phylogenetic analyses using multiple nuclear markers were performed. All crosses among different taxa or cpDNA clades set fruit, if crossing direction is not considered. The five nuclear phylogenies mostly did not support either the taxa or the cpDNA clades. A combined analysis of cpDNA and the PI exon revealed the two major lineages in the group, lacking a prezygotic isolating barrier between them. However, an asymmetric prezygotic isolating barrier occurs between populations of the Japanese main islands and of other areas, which belong to different cpDNA subclades. It seems reasonable to conclude that the development of a prezygotic isolating mechanism is not necessarily proportional to the degree of genetic divergence. These results suggested that species boundaries within the group are blurred due to speciational processes associated with multiple hybridization and introgression resulting from repeated contacts among differentiated populations.
S2235	J. P. Der;J. A. Thomson;J. K. Stratford;P. G. Wolf	2009	Global chloroplast phylogeny and biogeography of bracken (Pteridium: Dennstaedtiaceae)	American Journal of Botany							Bracken ferns (genus Pteridium) represent an ancient species complex with a natural worldwide distribution. Pteridium has historically been treated as comprising a single species, but recent treatments include several species. Phenotypic plasticity, geographically structured morphological variation, and geographically biased sampling have all contributed to taxonomic confusion in the genus. We sampled bracken specimens worldwide and used variable regions of the chloroplast genome to investigate phylogeography and reticulate evolution within the genus. Our results distinguish two major clades within Pteridium, a primarily northern hemisphere Laurasian/African clade which includes all taxa currently assigned to P. aquilinum, and a primarily southern hemisphere Austral/South American clade which includes P. esculentum and P. arachnoideum. All European accessions of P. aquilinum ssp. aquilinum appear in a monophyletic group and are nested within a clade containing the African P. aquilinum taxa (P. a. ssp. capense and P. a. ssp. centrali-africanum). Our results allow us to hypothesize the maternal progenitors of two allotetraploid bracken species, P. caudatum and P. semihastatum. We also discuss the biogeography of bracken in the context of the chloroplast phylogeny. Our study is one of the first to take a worldwide perspective in addressing variation in a broadly distributed species complex.
S2233	B. E. Pfeil;M. D. Crisp	2009	The age and biogeography of Citrus and the orange subfamily (Rutaceae: Aurantioideae) in Australasia and New Caledonia	American Journal of Botany							The geological history of Australia, New Guinea, New Caledonia, and SE Asia, has been complex, resulting in competing biogeographic hypotheses for taxa found here. Alternative hypotheses ˆ Gondwanan vicariance, rafting terranes, long-distance dispersal ˆ may be distinguished by different predicted divergence times between disjunct sister taxa. Taxa within Rutaceae subfamily Aurantioideae are ideal for testing these hypotheses because of their distributions. Therefore, the age of Rutaceae and subfamily Aurantioideae were estimated using molecular dating. One dataset comprised 51 sequences of rbcL and atpB with sampling across rosids and three fossil calibrations: crown Fabales+Fagales+Rosales (> 94 Ma), Fabaceae (> 51 Ma) and stem Ailanthus, Simaroubaceae (> 52 Ma). Another dataset comprised 81 Aurantioideae using > 8 kb of chloroplast sequence and secondary calibration. Confidence in estimated divergence times was explored by varying the root age, dating method (strict, local and relaxed clocks) and inclusion of internal calibrations. We conclude that the Rutaceae crown diverged in the Eocene (36.4 ˆ 56.8 Ma, mean 47.6), whereas the Aurantioideae crown originated in the early Miocene (12.1 ˆ 28.2 Ma, mean 19.8). This suggests that Gondwanan vicariance does not explain the distributions of extant Aurantioideae. Taxa found in New Caledonia may have arrived by three separate trans-oceanic dispersal events.
S2193	B. D. Schrire;M. Lavin;N. P. Barker;F. Forest	2009	Phylogeny of the tribe Indigofereae (Leguminosae-Papilionoideae): geographically structured more in succulent rish and temperate settings than in grass-rich environments	American Journal of Botany							This analysis goes beyond most published phylogenies in exploring how phylogentic structure imposed by ecology, geography and morphology can be interpreted to reveal significant new information about the evolution of a group. It covers a comprehensive range of morphological, ecological, and biogeographical diversity within tribe Indigofereae and among outgroups from the sister tribes Millettieae, Abreae and Phaseoleae. A combined data set of 321 terminal taxa (over one-third of the tribe) by 80 morphological characters, 833 aligned sites from the nuclear ribosomal ITS/5.8S region, and an indel data set of 33 characters was subjected to parsimony analysis. Notable results include the Madagascan dry forest Disynstemon resolved as sister to tribe Indigofereae, and all species of the large genus Indigofera are resolved in just four main clades, each diagnosable by morphological synapomorphies and ecological and geographical predilections. This suggests niche conservation (ecology) and dispersal limitation (geography) are important processes shaping the Indigofereae phylogeny. Tropical dry succulent-rich vegetation and the north-east to south-west African Arid Corridor are considered pivotal to the diversification of Indigofera. A rates analysis of nucleotide substitutions confirms the ages of the oldest crown clades are mostly younger than 16 Ma, implicating dispersal in explaining the worldwide distribution of the tribe. Clades confined to temperate and succulent-rich vegetation show more geographical phylogenetic structure than those inhabiting tropical grass-rich vegetation. Dispersal limitation in these vegetation types is more pronounced than in savanna vegetation. This comprehensive study will provide a context for ongoing and future evolutionary studies of this legume group and in general to species-rich pantropical genera like Indigofera.
S2351	M. L. Davey;R. S. Currah	2009	Atradidymella muscivora gen. et sp. nov. (Pleosporales) and its anamorph Phoma muscivora sp. nov.: A new pleomorphic pathogen of boreal bryophytes	American Journal of Botany	96	7	1281-1288	10.3732/ajb.0900010			During a survey of bryophilous fungi from boreal and montane habitats, 12 isolates of a hitherto unknown plant pathogenic member of the Pleosporales were recovered from Aulacomnium palustre, Hylocomium splendens, and Polytrichum juniperinum, and described as Atradidymella muscivora gen. et sp. nov. Atradidymella is characterized by minute, unilocular, setose pseudothecia; brown, fusiform, 1-septate ascospores; and a Phoma anamorph. The genus is distinguished from all other Pleosporalean genera with brown, fusiform ascospores on the basis of ascospore and pseudothecium morphology, and a highly reduced stroma that is localized within a single host cell. Atradidymella muscivora is distinguished by its minute pseudothecia (<115 &#956;m) and ascospores that are slightly allantoid and constricted at the septum with the upper cell often wider than the lower. Its anamorph, Phoma muscivora sp. nov., is morphologically distinguishable from P. herbarum in having smaller conidia. Parsimony analysis of the ITS region indicates A. muscivora has affinities to the Phoma-Ascochyta-Didymella clade that is sister to the Phaeosphaeriaceae within the Pleosporales.
S2300	R. Cerros-Tlatilpa;J. T. Columbus	2009	C3 photosynthesis in Aristida longifolia: implication for photosynthesis diversification in Aristidoideae (Poaceae)	American Journal of Botany	96	8	1379-1387	10.3732/ajb.0800265			Only a small percentage of plant species undergo C4 photosynthesis. Despite its rarity, the C4 pathway has evolved numerous times from C3 ancestors, with as many as 18 independent origins in grasses alone. We report non-Kranz (C3) anatomy in Aristida longifolia, a species in a genus of ca. 300 species previously thought to possess only Kranz (C4) anatomy. Leaf blade transections of A. longifolia show widely spaced vascular bundles, nonradiate chlorenchyma, and few or no chloroplasts in cells of the sheaths surrounding the vascular bundle, all features indicative of C3 photosynthesis. Carbon isotope ratios range from -27.68 to -29.71%, likewise indicative of C3 photosynthesis. We also estimate the phylogeny of Aristidoideae, comprising Aristida, Sartidia (C3), and Stipagrostis (C4), using a sample of 11 species, including A. longifolia, and DNA sequences of the nuclear ribosomal internal transcribed spacer region and the chloroplast rpl16 intron and trnL-trnF region. Sartidia and Stipagrostis resolve as sisters, and sister to this clade is Aristida. Aristida longifolia resolves as sister to the remaining species in the genus. C3 photosynthesis is hypothesized to be ancestral in Aristidoideae, which means the C4 pathway evolved twice in the subfamily-in Stipagrostis and early in the diversification of the Aristida clade.
S2371	A. L. Grusz;M. D. Windham;K. M. Pryer	2009	Deciphering the origins of apomictic polyploids in the Cheilanthes yavapensis complex (Pteridaceae)	American Journal of Botany	96	9	1636-1645	10.3732/ajb.0900019			Deciphering species relationships and hybrid origins in polyploid agamic species complexes¬ is notoriously difficult. In this study of cheilanthoid ferns we demonstrate increased resolving power for clarifying the origins of polyploid lineages by integrating evidence from a diverse selection of biosystematic methods. The prevalence of polyploidy, hybridization, and apomixis in ferns suggests that these processes play a significant role in their evolution and diversification. Using a combination of systematic approaches, we investigated the origins of apomictic polyploids belonging to the Cheilanthes yavapensis complex. Spore studies allowed us to assess ploidy levels; plastid and nuclear DNA sequencing revealed evolutionary relationships and confirmed the putative progenitors (both maternal and paternal) of taxa of hybrid origin; enzyme electrophoretic evidence provided information on genome dosage in allopolyploids. We find here that the widespread apomictic triploid, Cheilanthes lindheimeri, is an autopolyploid derived from a rare, previously undetected, sexual diploid. The apomictic triploid Cheilanthes wootonii is shown to be an interspecific hybrid between C. fendleri and C. lindheimeri, whereas the apomictic tetraploid C. yavapensis is comprised of two cryptic and geographically distinct lineages. We show that earlier morphology-based hypotheses of species relationships, while not altogether incorrect, only partially explain the complicated evolutionary history of these ferns.
S2335	N. Ishikawa;J. Yokoyama;H. Tsukaya	2009	Molecular evidence of reticulate evolution in the subgenus Plantago (Plantaginaceae)	American Journal of Botany	96	9	1627-1635	10.3732/ajb.0800400			Polyploidization is one of the frequent evolutionary events in plants that has large influence on speciation and evolution of the genome. Worldwide-distributed subgenus Plantago is taxonomically complex group with high rates of polyploid. Our molecular phylogenetic analyses with a nuclear-encoding single-copy gene SUC1 (1.2&#8211;1.8 kb) revealed allopolyploidy in two common polyploids (tetraploid P. asiatica var. densiuscula and hexaploid P. formosana) distributed in Japan. Then we investigated 24 taxa representing all five sections of the subgenus Plantago and two taxa from subgenus Coronopus as the outgroup. Fifteen known polyploids and one putative polyploid, ranging from tetraploid to dodecaploid, were analyzed to examine occurrence of reticulate evolution among subgenus Plantago. Phylogenetic relationships were estimated by maximum parsimony, neighbor-joining, and Bayesian analyses. For the first time, our analysis provides a well-resolved phylogenetic tree of subgenus Plantago. Our analyses clearly indicated highly reticulate nature of subgenus Plantago. In addition, our data suggested the possibility of two independent long-distance dispersals from the Northern Hemisphere to Southern Hemisphere.
S2270	D. R. Morgan;R. L. Korn;S. L. Mugleston	2009	Insights into reticulate evolution in Machaerantherinae (Asteraceae: Astereae): 5S ribosomal RNA spacer variation, estimating support for incongruence, and constructing reticulate phylogenies	American Journal of Botany	96		920-932	10.3732/ajb.0800308			Although reticulate evolution has been a frequent occurrence during the history of plants, determining how it has contributed to plant evolution will require analyzing many nuclear loci and developing effective analytical methods. The objective of this study was to make progress toward meeting these requirements in the evolutionarily complex subtribe Machaerantherinae. The 5S ribosomal RNA (rRNA) spacer was investigated to characterize its structure and variation. Analysis of the spacer supported relationships that were mostly the same as those supported by ITS and ETS sequence data. Two methods were used to estimate support for 11 occurrences of incongruence between 5S/ITS/ETS and cpDNA datasets. The best-supported examples were used to construct reticulate phylogenies, which hypothesized reticulate histories for five species and groups. For three of them, 5S and ITS/ETS evidence supported the same or similar relationships, indicating that these two regions of the nuclear genome were descended from the same ancestor or from two closely related ancestors, with cpDNA coming from a more distantly related ancestor. 5S and ITS/ETS evidence disagreed on the relationships of Arida riparia, suggesting that its ITS/ETS region has come from one ancestor, and its 5S region and cpDNA from a different ancestor.
S2271	D. M. Spooner	2009	DNA barcoding will frequently fail in complicated plant groups: an example in wild potatoes	American Journal of Botany	96		1177-1189	10.3732/ajb.0800246			DNA barcoding ("barcoding" ) has been proposed as a rapid and practical molecular method to identify species via diagnostic variation in short orthologous DNA sequences from one or a few universal genomic regions. It seeks to address in a rapid and simple way the "taxonomic impediment" of a greater need for taxonomic identifications than the supply of taxonomists. This study tests barcoding with the most variable and frequently suggested plant barcoding regions: the internal non-transcribed spacer of nuclear ribosomal DNA (ITS), and the plastid markers trnH-psbA intergenic spacer, and matK, in a complicated plant group, Solanum sect. Petota; wild potatoes. These DNA regions fail to provide species-specific markers in sect. Petota because ITS has too much intraspecific variation and the plastid markers lack sufficient polymorphism. The complications seen in wild potatoes are common in many plant groups, but they have not been assessed with barcoding. Barcoding is a retroactive procedure that relies on well defined species to function, is based solely on a limited number of DNA sequences that are often inappropriate at the species level, has been poorly tested with geographically well-dispersed replicate samples from difficult taxonomic groups, and discounts substantial practical and theoretical problems in defining species.
S2418	Y. P. Springer	2009	Do extreme environments provide a refuge from pathogens? A phylogenetic test using serpentine flax	American Journal of Botany	96		2010-2021	10.3732/ajb.0900047			Because abiotically extreme environments are often associated with physiological stressful conditions, small, low-density populations, and depauperate flora and fauna relative to more benign settings, organisms that occupy these stressful habitats may experience fitness benefits associated with reductions in the frequency and/or intensity of antagonistic species interactions. I investigated a particular form of this effect, the pathogen refuge hypothesis, through a study of 13 species of wild flax that grow on stressful serpentine soils and are often infected by a pathogenic fungal rust. The host species vary in the degree of their serpentine association: some specialize on extreme serpentine soils while others are generalists that occur on soils with a wide range of serpentine influence. Phylogenetically explicit analyses of soil chemistry and field-measured infection rates indicated that rust infection was significantly less frequent and severe in flax populations growing in more stressful, low calcium serpentine soils. These findings may help to explain the persistence of extremophile species in habitats where stressful physical conditions often impose strong autecological fitness costs on associated organisms. Ancestral state reconstruction of serpentine soil tolerance (approximated using soil calcium concentrations) suggested that the ability to tolerate extreme serpentine soils may have evolved multiple times within the focal genus.
S2352	D. C. Tank;R. G. Olmstead	2009	The evolutionary origin of a second radiation of annual Castilleja (Orobanchaceae) species in South America: the role of long distance dispersal and allopolyploidy	American Journal of Botany	96		1907-1921	10.3732/ajb.0800416			In addition to the North American annual species distributed chiefly in California, a second radiation of annual Castilleja is in Andean Peru and central Chile. Phylogenetic analyses of multiple chloroplast and nuclear DNA regions revealed a complex history for the origin and diversification of the annual Castilleja species in South America. In addition to at least three independent long distance dispersal events from North America, allopolyploidy has also played a significant role in the disjunct radiation of annual Castilleja in South America. Castilleja attenuata is the only annual species from California that occurs in South America, and these results support the relatively recent arrival of this species to central Chile, separate from the other, mostly Peruvian species. Two Peruvian species, C. profunda and C. cerroana, are inferred to be of independent allopolyploid origin. Hybridization between annual Castilleja lineages derived from two independent long distance dispersal events from North America gave rise to the allopolyploid Castilleja profunda, and hybridization between South American annual and perennial species gave rise to the allopolyploid C. cerroana. The relative importance of long distance dispersal and allopolyploidy to the diversification of the annuals in South America are discussed with reference to the observed morphological, ecological, and distributional patterns.
S2458	P. R. Steele;L. M. Friar;L. E. Gilbert;R. K. Jansen	2009	Molecular Systematics of the Neotropical genus Psiguria (Cucurbitaceae): Implications for phylogeny and species identification	American Journal of Botany	97		156-173	10.3732/ajb.0900192			Psiguria is a small genus of Neotropical vines in Central and South America and the Caribbean. As with many groups of tropical vines, delineation of species within the genus has long been a challenge for several reasons. Morphological features often change drastically over the life of an individual, many sterile specimens have been collected, and it is difficult or impossible to collect or include an entire plant on an herbarium sheet. We present the first published phylogeny of Psiguria utilizing a combination of eight chloroplast intergenic spacers, the internal transcribed spacer (ITS) regions of the nuclear ribosomal DNA repeat, and the intron of the low-copy nuclear gene serine/threonine phosphatase, for a total aligned length of 9,456 base pairs. The data support the monophyly of Psiguria, elucidate several species boundaries within the genus, and provide a phylogenetic framework for addressing many important questions about plant-insect interactions in this model system. Additionally, a list of Psiguria-specific DNA barcodes is presented, which include the chloroplast regions: ndhC-trnV, rps16-trnQ, rpoB-trnC, ndhF-rpL32, and psbZ-trnM. For the first time, systematists, ecologists, and evolutionary biologists will have the tools to confidently identify species of Psiguria with DNA barcodes that may be useful in other genera of Cucurbitaceae.
S2451	R. Pätsch;J. Hentschel;R. Linares-Palomino;R. L. Zhu;J. Heinrichs	2010	Diversification and taxonomy of the liverwort Jubula Dumort. (Jungermanniopsida: Porellales) inferred from nuclear and chloroplast DNA sequences	American Journal of Botany	35	1	6-12	10.1600/036364410790862515			Nucleotide sequence variation in the ITS1-5.8S-ITS2 region of nuclear ribosomal DNA and in the trnL-trnF region of chloroplast DNA from 28 specimens of Jubula (Jubulaceae), and two outgroup species, was analysed using maximum parsimony and maximum likelihood. The molecular topologies supported five to six allopatric taxa in Jubula. Relationships of most of these taxa remain unresolved due to lack of support of many deeper nodes. A Principal Component Analysis indicated a broad overlap of morphological characters of these taxa. Based on the morphological similarities of the Jubula taxa and the observed low sequence variation, a subspecies concept is supported. This comprises the taxa J. hutchinsiae subsp. bogotensis, subsp. hutchinsiae, subsp. japonica, subsp. javanica and subsp. pennsylvanica. With the exception of J. hutchinsiae subsp. javanica, all these taxa are monophyletic. Multiple accessions of the temperate taxa J. hutchinsiae subsp. hutchinsiae and J. hutchinsiae subsp. pennsylvanica exhibit a lower sequence variation than the tropical taxa J. hutchinsiae subsp. bogotensis and J. hutchinsiae subsp. javanica.
S2500	V. L. Woo;M. M. Funke;J. F. Smith;P. J. Lockhart;P. J. Garnock-Jones	2011	New World Origins of Southwest Pacific Gesneriaceae: Multiple Movements Across and Within the South Pacific	American Journal of Botany	172	3	434-357	10.1086/658183			Coronanthereae is a tribe of twenty species with a suite of unusual morphological characters and a disjunct geographic distribution in the southern hemisphere with three species in southern South America and the remainder in the South Pacific. This distribution and disjunction has implied a relictual Gondwanan clade sister to the rest of the Gesneriaceae. We tested this hypothesis using phylogenetic analyses of nuclear and chloroplast DNA sequence data and molecular dating. The tribe is well placed within the mostly neotropical subfamily Gesnerioideae and three lineages within Coronanthereae are supported, providing an unexpected inferred history of at least two dispersals from South America into the South Pacific during the Miocene. The tree-forming species form a clade; Australian Lenbrassia, New Caledonian Depanthus and Negria from Lord Howe Island. Australian Fieldia forms a clade with other epiphytes from South America, a result that does not support recent placement of Lenbrassia in synonymy of Fieldia. This provides further evidence of long-distance dispersal mechanisms in the floras of continental islands, and does not support the speculation of a Gondwanan origin for this family. Within Coronanthereae, we recognize three subtribes, Coronantherinae, Mitrariinae, and Negriinae; the last of these is newly described here.
S1074	X. S. Qu;B. J. Christ	2004	Genetic variation and phylogeny of Spongospora subterranea f. sp. subterranea based on ribosomal DNA sequence analysis	American Journal of Potato Research							The nuclear rDNA regions of the two internal transcribed spacers (ITS1 and ITS2) and 5.8S rRNA gene from 52 field isolates of Spongospora subterranea f. sp. subterranea obtained from the British Isles and North America were polymerase chain reaction-amplified, sequenced and assessed for genetic variation. Two genetically distinct groups (I and II) were identified based on the ITS sequence diversity among the isolates, representing 34.6% and 65.4% of the isolates, respectively. British Isles isolates occurred in groups I and II, whereas North American isolates belonged only to group II. The British Isles groups of S. subterranea were associated with particular potato cultivars. The full length small-subunit rRNA gene of S. subterranea was sequenced and analyzed by both neighbor-joining and parsimony methods to clarify the taxonomic position of this pathogen. The results of phylogenetic analysis showed that S. subterranea grouped together with other species of plasmodiphorids and this group clustered with the phylum Cercozoa, an assemblage of filose and reticulose amoebae and phylogenetically related zooflagellates. The recognition of the existence of different genetic groups within S. subterranea will be important for the design of plant breeding programs and in testing for plant resistance.
S638	N. I. Platnick;J. A. Coddington;R. R. Forster;C. E. Griswold	1991	Spinneret morphology and the phylogeny of haplogyne spiders	American Museum Novitates	3016		1-73		http://hdl.handle.net/2246/5043		Scanning electron microscopy is used to survey the spinneret morphology of representatives of 47 genera of araneomorph spiders with haplogyne female genitalia. In most of the examined lower araneomorphs--some 20 families of hypochiloids, austrochiloids, and classical Haplogynae (including the cribellate family Filistatidae)--there is no evidence of cylindrical gland spigots. Only in the Leptonetidae and Telemidae do females have a spigot type, on both the posterior median and posterior lateral spinnerets, that is not also present in males, and that may therefore serve cylindrical glands. Cylindrical glands seem otherwise to be synapomorphic for a large group of about 70 higher araneomorph families corresponding roughly to the classical concept of Entelegynae (but including those palpimanoid and orbicularian taxa with haplogyne females). A data matrix including 67 characters for 35 haplogyne and eight related genera, belonging to 36 families, is presented and analyzed. The results suggest that the classical Haplogynae form a monophyletic group but that the superfamily Scytodoidea is paraphyletic. Paracribellar spigots, previously reported only on the posterior median spinnerets, apparently occur also on the posterior lateral spinnerets of austrochilids and filistatids. The family Loxoscelidae is placed as a junior synonym of Sicariidae.
S12x9x97c11c19c40	D. A. Grimaldi;D. Agosti;J. M. Carpenter	1997	New and rediscovered primitive ants (Hymenoptera: Formicidae) in Createous Amber from New Jersey, and their phylogenetic relationships	American Museum Novitates	3208		1-43		http://hdl.handle.net/2246/3615		All Cretaceous records of ants are reviewed, and evidence originally given for their placement is evaluated. Cretaceous Formicoidea preserved in rocks lack preservation of critical ant synapomorphies like the metapleural gland, which are preserved in specimens in amber. For this reason, the Armaniidae Dlussky, from the Cretaceous of Russia, are placed here as Formicoidea incertae sedis, not in the Formicidae proper. The oldest amber with ants is from New Jersey. Seven complete and partial specimens of Formicidae, recently discovered in Turonian (92 Ma) amber from central New Jersey, are described and discussed. The specimens consist of four males and three workers. One complete and well preserved worker is Sphecomyrma freyi Wilson and Brown 1967, known previously from two workers in a piece of Turonian amber from Cliffwood Beach, New Jersey. Well preserved in the new worker are external and even some internal features of the metapleural gland -- a definitive formicid synapomorphy -- which are described in detail for the first time. This specimen is designated as a neotype to replace the disintegrated holotype of this species. One complete male specimen is tentatively assigned to Sphecomyrma, which would be the first known male of the genus. One complete and one partial male, both from the same piece of amber, are a new, plesiomorphic species of Baikuris Dlussky (Baikuris casei, n.sp.), the genus previously known only from upper Cretaceous (Santonian) amber of Taymyr, northern Siberia. Two workers represent a new genus and species of Cretaceous Formicidae, Brownimecia clavata n. gen., n. sp. based on distinctively clubbed antennae, proportions of the antennal articles, and thin mandibles that lack teeth and extensively cross, and a ponerine-like constriction between abdominal segments III and IV (gaster segments I and II). Brownimecia is more closely related to extant Formicidae than are Sphecomyrminae, the genus apparently being the earliest known member of the extant subfamily Ponerinae. The fourth male belongs to a third genus, undescribed. These are the oldest definitive ants. Composition, monophyly, and systematic position of the subfamily Sphecomyrminae are discussed. Modifications were made to the data of Baroni Urbani et al. 1992 and reanalyses were made of the basal relationships of the Formicidae including Sphecomyrma and Brownimecia. Discrepencies with the cladograms of Baroni Urbani et al. (1992) are discussed. Including into the cladistic analysis the fossil taxon Formiciinae Lutz (compressed remains from the Eocene of Germany), as done by Baroni Urbani et al., imparts too many missing values for meaningful analysis. Sphecomyrma, not discussed by Baroni Urbani et al., retains its basal position in the Formicidae in the present analysis. Discovery of new and exclusively primitive ants in upper Cretaceous ambers indicates an origin of the ants probably in the lowermost Cretaceous, but no older, contrary to a recent molecular hypothesis.
S589	J. H. Geisler	2001	New morphological evidence for the phylogeny of Artiodactyla, Cetacea, and Mesonychidae	American Museum Novitates	3344		1-53	10.1206/0003-0082(2001)344<0001:NMEFTP>2.0.CO;2			Parsimony-based analyses of a data set including 68 taxa coded for 186 morphological characters corroborate monophyly of Artiodactyla (even-toed ungulates), Suiformes (hippos, pigs, peccaries), Neoselenodontia (camels, deer, cows), and Acreodi (whales, dolphins, porpoises, mesonychids). Additional findings include a sister-group relationship between Cainotheriidae and Cameloidea (Camelidae + Oromerycidae), Elomeryx as the sister group to all other suiform artiodactyls, Protoceratidae as the basal branch of Neoselenodontia, and paraphyly of Mesonychidae. The molecule-based groups Whippomorpha (whales, dolphins, hippos), Cetruminantia (whales, deer, cows), and Artiofabula (whales, cows, pigs) are contradicted by these data and occur together in trees that are at least 25 steps longer than the most parsimonious ones. In terms of tree length, the molecule-based topology is contradicted by morphological data with and without extinct taxa, and unlike previous, morphology-based analyses, the exclusion of Cetacea from the clade of living artiodactyls is not dependent on the inclusion of extinct taxa. Artiodactyla is diagnosed in all most parsimonious trees by several characters, including a short mastoid process of the petrosal, absence of an alisphenoid canal, and presence of an entocingulum on P4. Some previously suggested artiodactyl synapomorphies, such as an enlarged facial exposure of the lacrimal and absence of contact between the frontal and alisphenoid, are shown to be synapomorphies of more exclusive clades within Artiodactyla.
S2427	D. San Mauro;M. Vences;M. Alcobendas;R. Zardoya;A. Meyer	2005	Initial diversification of living amphibians predated the breakup of Pangaea	American Naturalist	165	5	590-599	10.1086/429523			The origin and divergence of the three living orders of amphibians (Anura, Caudata, Gymnophiona) and their main lineages are one of the most hotly debated topics in vertebrate evolution. Here, we present a robust molecular phylogeny based on the nuclear RAG1 gene as well as results from a variety of alternative independent molecular clock calibrations. Our analyses suggest that the origin and early divergence of the three living amphibian orders dates back to the Palaeozoic or early Mesozoic, before the breakup of Pangaea, and soon after the divergence from lobe-finned fishes. The resulting new biogeographic scenario, age estimate, and the inferred rapid divergence of the three lissamphibian orders may account for the lack of fossils that represent plausible ancestors or immediate sister taxa of all three orders and the heretofore paradoxical distribution of some amphibian fossil taxa. Furthermore, the ancient and rapid radiation of the three lissamphibian orders likely explains why branch lengths connecting their early nodes are particularly short, thus rendering phylogenetic inference of implicated relationships especially difficult.
S2284	S. Joly;P. A. McLenachan;P. J. Lockhart	2009	A statistical approach for distinguishing hybridization and incomplete lineage sorting	American Naturalist	174	2	E54-E70	10.1086/600082			The extent and evolutionary significance of hybridization is difficult to evaluate because of the difficulty in distinguishing hybridization from incomplete lineage sorting. Here we present a novel parametric approach for statistically distinguishing hybridization from incomplete lineage sorting based on minimum genetic distances of a non recombining locus. It is based on the idea that the expected minimum genetic distance between sequences from two species is smaller for some hybridization events than for incomplete lineage sorting scenarios. When applied to empirical datasets, distributions can be generated for the minimum inter-species distances expected under incomplete lineage sorting using coalescent simulations. If the observed distance between sequences from two species is smaller than its predicted distribution, incomplete lineage sorting can be rejected and hybridization inferred. We demonstrate the power of the method using simulations and illustrate its application on New Zealand alpine buttercups (Ranunculus). The method is robust and complements existing approaches. Thus it should allow biologists to assess with greater accuracy the importance of hybridization in evolution.
S312	H. Hippa;I. Oksala	1983	Cladogenesis of the Enoplognatha ovata group (Araneae, Theridiidae), with description of a new Mediterranean species	Annales Entomologici Fennici	49		71-74				In addition to Enoplognatha ovata (Clerck), E. latimana Hippa & Oksala and E. penelope Hippa & Oksala, the E. ovata group is considered to include the species E. margarita Yaginuma and E. afrodite sp. n. The group is concluded to form one phyletic clade on the evidence of the synapomorphic similarity in the general body structure and colour pattern. The sequence of the sister species and groups is considered to be: ovata and latimana, penelope, margarita, afrodite. E. afrodite sp. n., widespread in the Mediterranean region, is distinguished by the submedian, not subapical, metatarsal trichobothrium. A redescription is given of the male palp and female epigyne and vulva of E. margarita. Index words: Enoplognatha ovata group, Araneae, Theridiidae, taxonomy, cladogenesis.
S575	M. K. Thayer	1997	Proglypholoma aenigma gen. et sp. nov., Glypholoma spp. nov. and new records, and a phylogenetic analysis of Glypholomatinae (Coleoptera: Staphylinidae)	Annales Zoologici	47	1/2/2012	157-174		http://psjc.icm.edu.pl/psjc/cgi-bin/getdoc.cgi?B00-7-41		The subfamily Glypholomatinae Jeannel, 1962 has contained only the genus Glypholoma Jeannel, 1962, first described from Chile; four species have been described from there and adjacent Argentina and one from southeastern Australia. A new genus and three new species from Chile are described here: Proglypholoma aenigma gen. et sp. nov., apparently the most basal member of Glypholomatinae; Glypholoma germaini sp. nov.; and G. chepuense sp. nov. New records are presented for all previously known species, and known distributions of all species are mapped. Analysis of relationships among the species is presented and the biogeography of the subfamily is discussed.
S5x6x97c11c40c36	J. M. Powell;D. M. Crayn;P. A. Gadek;C. J. Quinn;D. A. Morrison;A. R. Chapman	1996	A re-assessment of relationships within Epacridaceae	Annals of Botany	77	4	305-315	10.1006/anbo.1996.0036		cladistic; Epacridaceae; phylogeny; relationships; morphology	An extensive database of predominantly morphological characters has been assembled for the family. Problems of homology across the family and its outgroups were encountered for several characters. A phylogenetic analysis, using only those characters for which we were fairly confident of our assessment of homology, was undertaken to establish broad relationships within the family as a basis for a re-assessment of the supra-generic classification. The resultant phylogeny is weakly resolved and lacks robustness in the basal clades. Previous classifications of the family are assessed in the light of this analysis, and an alternative arrangement of four tribes is proposed.
S956	U. Meve;S. Liede	2003	Generic delimitations in tuberous Periplocoideae (Apocynaceae) from Africa and Madagascar	Annals of Botany	93	4	407-414	10.1093/aob/mch057			Representatives of nearly all African and Malagasy genera of Periplocoideae possessing root tubers were analyzed. Sequence data from two non-coding molecular markers (ITS region of nrDNA and trnT-L and trnL-F spacers as well as the trnL intron of cpDNA) give support for a broad taxonomic concept for Raphionacme including Pentagonanthus. Together with Schlechterella, which is sister to Raphionacme, all Raphionacme-like taxa form a derived monophyletic group of somewhat diverse species. Sister to the Schlechterella / Raphionacme clade is a clade comprised of Stomatostemma and the not truly tuberous vine Mondia. In the nuclear and combined analyses, sister to these two clades combined is a clade formed by Petopentia natalensis and Periploca. In consequence, the recent inclusion of the monotypic South African Petopentia in the monotypic Malagasy endemic Ischnolepis is to be rejected. Ischnolepis and the other Malagasy Periplocoideae investigated (Camptocarpus, Pentopetia) form a basal grade in the combined analysis, and a Malagasy origin for Periplocoideae is to be discussed.
S2299	B. Jacobs;F. Lens;E. Smets	2009	Evolution of fruit and seed characters in the Diervilla and Lonicera clades (Caprifoliaceae, Dipsacales)	Annals of Botany	104	2	253-276	10.1093/aob/mcp131			Background and Aims The Diervilla and Lonicera clades are members of the family Caprifoliaceae (Dipsacales sensu Donoghue, 2001). So far, the intergeneric relationships of the Lonicera clade remain equivocal as is the systematic position of Heptacodium. By studying fruit and seed morphology and anatomy, we want to clarify the intergeneric relationships of the Lonicera clade and elucidate the systematic position of Heptacodium. Additionally, the study deals with the evolution of fruit and seed characters of the Diervilla and Lonicera clades with reference to allied taxa. Methods Light and scanning electron microscopy were used for the morphological and anatomical investigations. Phylogenetic analyses were carried out by applying the parsimony and Bayesian inference optimality criteria. Character evolution was studied by means of parsimony optimization and stochastic character mapping. Key Results Diervilla and Weigela (Diervilla clade) are characterised by several unique traits for the order Dipsacales such as capsules with numerous seeds, seed coats without sclerified outer tangential exotestal cell walls and dehiscent fruits. Seeds with completely sclerified exotestal cells and fleshy fruits characterise the Lonicera clade. Leycesteria and Lonicera both have berries, ovaries without sterile carpels and several seeds per locule whereas Triosteum and Symphoricarpos bear drupes, have ovaries with one or two sterile carpels and a single seed per locule. Heptacodium shares several characteristics with members of the Linnina clade, e.g. achenes, single-seeded fruits and a compressed, parenchymatous seed coat. Conclusions Our results confirm the monophyly of the Diervilla and Lonicera clades and hypothesise a close relationship between Leycesteria and Lonicera and between Triosteum and Symphoricarpos. Fruit and seed morphology and anatomy point to a sister relationship of Heptacodium with the Linnina clade, rather than with the Lonicera clade.
S257	C. H. Nelson	1984	Numerical cladistic analysis of phylogenetic relationships in Plecoptera	Annals of the Entomological Society of America	77		466-473				This paper consists of a reassessment of phylogenetic relationships in Plecoptera using Zwick's (1980) character data. The data matrix (2Z taxa by 118 characters) was analyzed using the WAGNER option of the PHYLIP computer program. Six equally parsimonious minimum-length Wagner networks are discerned and rooted to form six Wagner trees. Incongruities among the Wagner trees must await resolution through the acquisition of additional characters. The computed Wagner trees are more parsimonious than the existing phylogenies of Ricker (1952), Illies (1965), Zwick (1980), and Brodskiy (1982). I show that the phylogenies of Zwick and Brodskiy are more congruent with the computer-generated Wagner trees than are those of Ricker and Illies. However, the analyses of the latter two workers are in accord with the Wagner trees in depicting the Eusthenioidea as the sister group to that taxon comprising the Gripopteryoidea; Scopuridae, Nemouroidea, and Systellognatha.
S769	J. W. Austin;A. L. Szalanski;P. Uva;A. G. Bagnères;A. Kence	2002	A comparative genetic analysis of the subterranean termite genus Reticulitermes (Isoptera: rhinotermitidae)	Annals of the Entomological Society of America	95	6	753-760	10.1603/0013-8746(2002)095[0753:ACGAOT]2.0.CO;2		COII; DNA sequence; genetic variation; population genetics; Reticulitermes; termite	DNA sequencing analysis of the mitochondrial DNA cytochrome oxidase II (COII) region was used to examine genetic variation in the termite genus Reticulitermes Holmgren. We examined 21 species and subspecies from three continents. Sequencing of a 677-bp region of a 780-bp amplicon from 41 individuals and from 17 sequences obtained from GenBank revealed 221 polymorphic sites within the genus. Tajima-Nei distances from species ranged from 0.9 to 12.7%, and parsimony and maximum likelihood analysis revealed several clades within the genus. Reticulitermes flavipes (Kollar) formed a distinct clade along with R. santonensis De Feytaud. European R. lucifugus (Rossi) formed a distinct clade with R. banyulensis (Béziers). Turkish R. lucifugus was distinct relative to European R. lucifugus, and along with R. clypeatus Lash from Israel formed a sister group with R. balkanensis Clément from Greece. This study provides support for the separation of Turkish R. lucifugus from European members of the species. This mitochondrial DNA marker was also able to identify several Reticulitermes specimens from Oklahoma, Texas, Missouri, and South Korea to R. flavipes, R. hageni Banks, R. virginicus (Banks), and R. speratus Shimizu.
S2027	P. T. Smith;B. V. Brown	2008	Utility of DNA Sequences for Inferring Phylogenetic Relationships and Associating Morphologically Dissimilar Males and Females of the Bee-Killing Flies, Genus Melaloncha (Diptera: Phoridae)	Annals of the Entomological Society of America							The bee-killing flies, genus Melaloncha, are parasitoids of bees of the family Apidae, including stingless bees, bumble bees and the western honey bee, Apis mellifera. With over 160 described species, Melaloncha is among the largest genera in the family Phoridae. Most species are known only from females as the males typically show too few differences to be useful in characterizing species. The monophyly of Melaloncha and its two subgenera (Udamochiras and Melaloncha s.s) is strongly supported by morphological characters, but the phylogenetic relationships among the various species and species groups are not well understood. Here we report on a preliminary molecular phylogenetic study of 30 exemplar Melaloncha species representing both subgenera and 7 species groups using a combination of nuclear (28S and CAD) and mitochondrial (12S, 16S, ND1 and CO1) genes for a total of 3306 bp. Maximum parsimony analysis suggested the following relationships: (1) Melaloncha is monophyletic, (2) the subgenus M. (Udamochiras) is monophyletic and is a sister-group to M. (Melaloncha), and (3) each of the species groups for which we had multiple species were monophyletic with the M. furcata-group being the sister-group to all other Group II taxa. These results support hypotheses of relationships based on morphological characters. The utility of the molecular data for associating morphologically dissimilar males and females is discussed.
S2x5x96c15c53c05	P. R. Crane	1985	Phylogenetic analysis of seed plants and the origin of angiosperms	Annals of the Missouri Botanical Garden	72		716-793				Principles of phylogenetic analysis (cladistics) are introduced with an examination of relationships among extant genera of Gnetales. The Gnetales can be supported as a monophyletic group, with Gnetum and Welwitschia more closely related to each other than either is to Ephedra. Characters of the progymnosperm Archaeopteris and 19 extinct and extant seed plant taxa are then reviewed as a basis for a cladistic analysis of their interrelationships. The seed plant taxa included are: medullosans, cycads, Lyginopteris, Cordaixylon, Mesoxylon, Lebachia, extant conifers, Ginkgo, Callistophyton, peltasperms, glossopterids, Caytonia, corystosperms, Bennettitales, Pentoxylon, Gnetum, Welwitschia, Ephedra, and angiosperms. Preliminary analyses of relationships within conifers, glossopterids, and Bennettitales are also presented. Results suggest that seed plants are a monophyletic group, and Lyginopteris is resolved as the sister taxon to all other seed plants considered. The cordaites, Cordaixylon and Mesoxylon, along with Lebachia, extant conifers, and Ginkgo constitute a monophyletic group. Pentoxylon is the sister taxon to Bennettitales, and the Gnetales are the sister group to angiosperms. Together the Gnetales plus the angiosperms form the sister group to the Bennettitales plus Pentoxylon. If the outer integument of bennettitalean and angiosperm ovules is interpreted as homologous with the cupule of Caytonia and corystosperms, then the corystosperms are resolved as the sister group to the Bennettitales plus Pentoxylon plus Gnetales plus angiosperm clade. Under this interpretation all the seed plant taxa considered except Lyginopteris, cycads, and medullosans are part of a single clade in which flattened seeds and saccate pollen are primitive. The principal difficulties with the cladistic analysis concern necessary inferences on unknown characters in certain plants, and the current absence of a large base of comparative data. Results of the analysis suggest that the seed ferns as currently circumscribed are not a meaningful group for phylogenetic purposes and permit an evaluation of the possible phylogenetic position of Eremopteris, Nystroemia, Spermopteris, Phasmatocycas, Vojnovskiales, Leptostrobus, and several other enigmatic groups of plant fossils. Comparison of the phylogenetic analysis with previous theories of angiosperm origin shows that it reconciles the ideas of Arber and Parkin, that Bennettitales and Gnetales are closely related to flowering plants, with more recent hypotheses that invoke Caytonia and corystosperms as highly relevant to the angiosperm problem. The results suggest that increased understanding of Triassic Bennettitales, Gnetales, and corystosperms will be of maximum interest in further elucidating the phylogenetic relationships of flowering plants.
S229	K. J. Sytsma;J. F. Smith	1988	DNA and morphology: comparisons in the Onagraceae	Annals of the Missouri Botanical Garden	75		1217-1237				Comparisons of systematic information generated from both classical systematic approaches and from DNA analysis at a number of taxonomic levels in the Onagraceae are presented. Phylogenetic results from chloroplast DNA restriction fragment analysis in Clarkia sect. Sympherica (= Peripetasma) are not entirely congruent with results from morphology, but are congruent with distribution of duplications of isozyme-coding loci. Chloroplast DNA and nuclear rDNA evidence for the origin of the monotypic genus Heterogaura from within the genus Clarkia is discussed with respect to morphological divergence between the two genera. Detailed chloroplast DNA restriction site mapping within the seven diploid sections of Clarkia and subsequent preliminary intersectional phylogenetic analysis are presented. These DNA-based relationships are compared with a morphological and cytological model of relationships and to various gene duplication-based models. Section Godetia is implicated as the sister group to the rest of Clarkia, a result concordant with preliminary cladistic analysis of morphological and isozymic characters. The monophyletic nature of sections encompassing the PGI gene duplication is not rejected or supported by this cpDNA restriction site analysis. Preliminary DNA restriction fragment analysis for the nine previously described sections of Fuchsia and one new section is presented and then compared with published biogeographical fossil morphological and cytological results. The preliminary chloropast DNA analysis in Fuchsia indicates that the disjunct Old World sect. Skinnera was the first lineage to diverge followed by the monotypic Central American sect. Jimenezia. The phylogenetic relationships of the other sections of Fuchsia remain unclear. Comparisons of systematic results using cpDNA restriction site variability and morphological cytological and isozymic variability are reviewed for the Onagraceae and other angiosperms.
S11x4x95c20c53c01	P. E. Berry	1989	A systematic revision of Fuchsia sect. Quelusia (Onagraceae)	Annals of the Missouri Botanical Garden	76		532-584				Fuchsia sect. Quelusia consists of nine closely related species, eight from southeastern Brazil and one from southern Chile and Argentina. This treatment recognizes F. alpestris and F. glazioviana as separate from F. regia and describes two new species from southern Brazil, F. brevilobis and F. hatschbachii. The section is defined by its shrubby-lianoid habit, opposite-whorled leaves, and distinctive floral pattern associated with hummingbird pollination. It is one of only two entirely polyploid sections in the genus. Unique characters of the section include the large, violet, convolute petals, strongly exserted stamens, and partially connate sepals that are longer than the floral tubes. All nine species occupy cool forest habitats that are remnants of the widespread Tertiary temperate forests of the Southern Hemisphere. With the Old World sect. Skinnera as the sister group of all the American species of Fuchsia, sect. Quelusia represents an early offshoot of the ancestral South American fuchsias, distinct from the tropical Andean and Central American sections in its polyploidy and derived, 3-porate pollen. The nearest relative and sister species of sect. Quelusia is F. lycioides, a specialized xerophyte and the sole member of sect. Kierschlegeria, which occurs in central Chile just north of the range of F. magellanica. The Andean and Brazilian populations of sect. Quelusia probably became isolated in the late Tertiary, when the austral temperate forests were broken up by increasing aridity to the east of the Andes, as these were strongly uplifted. While F. magellanica has not differentiated substantially throughout its range in the southern Andes, sect. Quelusia has radiated extensively in the subtropical mountains of southern Brazil, where five of the eight species are restricted to high, isolated mountain peaks. Fuchsia regia, on the other hand, is widespread at lower altitudes throughout the planalto and coastal mountains of southeastern Brazil; it is differentiated into three mostly allopatric but intergrading series of populations which are treated here as subspecies. Two of these subspecies are newly described, F. regia subsp. reitzii and F. regia subsp. serrae. Fuchsia regia is the only species now found to occur sympatrically with other members of the section, and it forms natural hybrids with at least five different species. The only naturally occurring octoploid populations in the genus occur in F. regia and appear to be recently derived.
S1x29x96c18c01c05	B. E. Hammel;G. J. Wilder	1989	Dianthoveus: A new genus of Cyclanthaceae	Annals of the Missouri Botanical Garden	76		112-123				Dianthoveus cremnophilus, a terrestrial Cyclanthaceae from southwestern Colombia to northern Ecuador, is described as a new genus and species. The cupules at the base of the stamens and the long, narrow, moderately flattened seeds are unique. Cladistic analysis supports the hypothesis that leaf idioblasts with randomly oriented styloids (leaves scabrous when dry), root styloids, sessile anthers, and inaperturate pollen are synapomorphies with the widespread, monospecific Evodianthus. The new genus differs fundamentally from Evodianthus by having a uniseriate staminate perianth and in seed shape and seed coat structure. Dianthoveus shares additional uncommon characters with Evodianthus (e.g., separate fruits, terminal inflorescences, symmetrical flowers) that are not unique in the family. With Schultesiophyturn it shares some of these uncommon characters but uniquely shares only laminar anther appendages. Although Dianthoveus and Dicranopygium subgenus Gleasonianthus uniquely share staminate flowers with eglandular tepals, no other characters suggest a close relationship between them.
S2x2x96c16c17c15	W. S. Judd	1989	Taxonomic studies in the Miconieae (Melastomataceae). III. Cladistic analysis of axillary-flowered taxa	Annals of the Missouri Botanical Garden	76		476-495				The axillary-flowered members of the Miconieae are hypothesized to be a monophyletic group, and the generic relationships within this group have been investigated by means of a preliminary cladistic analysis, which resulted in the following taxonomic conclusions. Henriettea is circumscribed broadly, including Henriettella and Llewelynia, as is Loreva, which is considered to include Bellucia and Myriaspora. The small genus Kirkbridea is likely the sister group of Henriettea sensu lato. Clidemia sect. Calophysoides and Maieta form a single clade and are considered congeneric. Mecranium (including Ekmaniocharis), Killipia, Huilaea, and the axillary-flowered 5- or 6-merous species of Ossaea all are considered generically distinct due to their isolated cladistic positions. Species of Clidemia sect. Sagraea along with Necramium and the axillary-flowered and 4-merous species of Ossaea are considered a distinct genus, Sagraea; an autapomorphy for this group was not consistently present in the generated cladograms, and the genus is considered metaphyletic. Clidemia sect. Miconiopsis, although usually considered axillary-flowered, actually has both terminal and axillary inflorescences and may be congeneric with Miconia (and likely is related closely to sect. Tamonea). Thus, axillary-flowered groups recognized at the generic level include: Henriettea, Huilaea, Killipia, Kirkbridea, Loreya, Maieta, Mecranium, Pentossaea, and Sagraea. Axillary-flowered Miconieae appear to form two major clades based primarily on the crystal type present in the leaf mesophyll and stem. Megastyloids (sometimes along with druses) occur in Loreya, Kirkbridea, and Henriettea, while only druses are found in the remaining genera. Cladistic relationships among the genera possessing only druse crystals are obscure, although Huilaea is probably basal within this complex, as reflected by its large flowers with well-developed pedicels, and Sagraea is likely most closely related to Mecranium, the two being linked by the synapomorphy of 4-merous flowers. Relationships of axillary-flowered taxa to those with terminal infloresences are discussed briefly.
S262	A. W. Meerow	1989	Systematics of the Amazon lilies, Eucharis and Caliphruria (Amaryllidaceae)	Annals of the Missouri Botanical Garden	76		136-220				Eucharis and Caliphruria are closely related, neotropical genera of petiolate-leaved, white-flowered Amaryllidaceae found in the understory of primary tropical rain forest. Together with the Peruvian endemic Urceolina, Eucharis and Caliphruria form a monophyletic group within infrafamily Pancratioidinae on the basis of leaf and seed morphology and ecological specialization. Seventeen species and two natural hybrids within two subgenera are recognized in Eucharis. Eucharis, marked by its crateriform or campanulate flowers, curved perianth tube, pigmented androecium usually developed into a staminal cup, and unicellular stigmatic papillae, is distributed from Guatemala to Bolivia, chiefly in the western Amazon basin and adjacent lower slopes of the eastern Andes. Subgenus Heterocharis represents three relict species and two natural hybrids with many ancestral characters of the genus. Caliphruria (four species, three of which are endemic to Colombia) has funnelform flowers, straight perianth tube, reduced staminal connation, and multicellular stigmatic papillae. Cladistic relationships support the monophyly of Eucharis, Caliphruria, and Urceolina as a unified group. The most parsimonious cladograms suggest that Eucharis is paraphyletic if subg. Heterocharis is included. An alternative hypothesis of generic relationships is tested, and proves less parsimonious. Recognizing the close phenetic relationship of subg. Heterocharis to the rest of Eucharis, the high levels of homoplasy within the cladogram, and ambiguity caused by missing character state data, a less parsimonious phylogeny is accepted as the basis for classification. Keys and descriptions are provided for all species of Eucharis and Caliphruria. Eucharis caucana, a novel hexaploid (2n = 138) species, is described from Colombia.
S1x29x96c14c51c36	P. A. Cox	1990	Pollination and the evolution of breeding systems in Pandanaceae	Annals of the Missouri Botanical Garden	77		816-840				The Pandanaceae include three genera: Pandanus with 700 species and a large range, Freycinetia with 200 species and a smaller range, and Sararanga with two species and a very limited range. Using Cyclanthaceae, Araceae, and Arecaceae as outgroups, cladistic analysis of Pandanaceae suggests Pandanus and Sararanga to be more closely related to each other than either is to Freycinetia. Data concerning pollination biology and breeding systems are superimposed upon the consensus tree derived from this analysis. Vertebrate pollination and dioecism appear to be ancestral in Pandanaceae, with anemophily in Pandanus and entomophily in Sararanga to be independently derived conditions. Only a few changes in inflorescence morphology were necessary to facilitate these profound changes in pollination syndromes. Dioecism, while perhaps adaptive for vertebrate-pollinated Pandanaceae such as Freycinetia, may have been maladaptive for Pandanus and Sararanga. The ill-effects of dioecism on long.distance dispersal have been partially overcome in Freycinetia by the evolution of leaky dioecy and self-compatibility and largely overcome in Pandanus through the evolution of facultative apomixis. The deleterious effects of dioecism appear to be unmitigated in Sararanga and may lead to its eventual extinction. The interplay of pollination syndromes and breeding systems appears to have strongly influenced range expansion and speciation in the Pandanaceae.
S11x4x95c21c16c44	J. V. Crisci;P. E. Berry	1990	A phylogenetic reevaluation of the Old World species of Fuchsia	Annals of the Missouri Botanical Garden	77		517-522				The four Old World species of Fuchsia—F. cyrtandroides, F. excorticata, F. perscandens, and F. procumbens— form a monophyletic group (sect. Skinnera) defined by blue pollen and the presence of flavones in all species. Data on foliar flavonoid compounds in the section were reanalyzed, and additional nonflavonoid characters were employed to make a phylogenetic reevaluation of the group, using the rest of the genus as the outgroup. Of 17 characters used, 7 were phylogenetically informative, resulting in two equally most parsimonious cladograms 23 steps long. Both have a consistency index of 0.75 when all noninformative characters are excluded. The two trees differ in the position of the Tahitian F. cyrtandroides and the New Zealand F. procumbens, each of which appears as the sister group of the other species in the respective cladograms. In both trees, F. excorticata and F. perscandens form a clade defined by constricted floral tubes. These results differ from a prior cladistic analysis of the section based primarily on flavonoids, which placed F. cyrtandroides unambiguously as the sister species of the rest of the section and grouped F. procumbens in a clade with F. perscandens.
S11x5x95c20c49c05	J. V. Crisci;E. A. Zimmer;P. C. Hoch;G. B. Johnson;C. Mudd;N. S. Pan	1990	Phylogenetic implcations of ribosomal DNA restriction site variation in the plant family Onagraceae	Annals of the Missouri Botanical Garden	77		523-538				Phylogenetic relationships in the family Onagraceae were assessed using ribosomal DNA restriction site mapping. Sixty-five restriction sites were detected among 11 species of Onagraceae (one each of Circaea, Fuchsia, Hauya, Oenothera, and Ludwigia, and six species of Epilobium) using 20 restriction enzymes. Phylogenetic analysis of the data was performed using both Wagner and Dollo parsimony, and the resulting monophyletic groups were tested by the bootstrap method. The trees were rooted by using Ludwigia as a functional outgroup. Phenetic approaches (cluster analysis and principal coordinate analysis) were also applied to the data as a complement to the cladistic analysis. Wagner parsimony analysis generated four equally parsimonious trees (53 steps, consistency index.0.76), and Dollo parsimony analysis generated six equally parsimonious trees (59 steps, consistency index 0.67). In all trees the six species of Epilobium form a monophyletic group. Independent data on Onagraceae (morphological, cytological, anatomical, chemosystematic, and molecular) strongly support one of the six phylogenetic hypotheses generated by Dollo parsimony analysis, in which Circaea, Fuchsia, and Hauya form one branch with Circaea the sister group to Fuchsia-Hauya, and Oenothera and Epilobium form the other branch. Cluster analysis and principal component analysis do not agree with the phylogenetic analyses mainly in the position of Epilobium, suggesting the possibility of different rates of evolutionary change in different lines of the family.
S1x29x96c17c05c05	P. Goldblatt	1990	Systematics of Lapeirousia (Iridaceae-Ixioideae) in tropical Africa	Annals of the Missouri Botanical Garden	77		430-484				The genus Lapeirousia, a member of the predominantly African subfamily Ixioideae of Iridaceae, is one of five genera of tribe Watsonieae and is the only one that is widespread in southern and tropical Africa. In this revision of the tropical members of the genus, 16 species are recognized, 14 assigned to the largely tropical sect. Paniculata (subg. Paniculata) and two to the largely temperate southern African sect. Sophronia (subg. Lapeirousia). One new species, L. angolensis, is described and L. teretifolia is raised from subspecies to species rank. The center for tropical African Lapeirousia is northern Namibia, but species occur across south tropical Africa to Mozambique and north to Ethiopia, Sudan, and Nigeria. Lapeirousia is one of few genera well represented in both tropical Africa and the winter-rainfall region of temperate southern Africa, and it is unique in its wide distribution in drier parts of Africa rather than the well.watered eastern highland areas of the continent. Variation among the species is largely floral, and flowers range from completely actinomorphic to medianly zygomorphic and from short-tubed to extremely longtubed. An unusual degree of chromosomal variation occurs in sect. Paniculata with numbers ranging from n = 8, 7, 6, 5, 4, to 3 and karyotypes from strongly bimodal to relatively uniform. Chromosome cytology correlates to some degree with patterns of morphological variation and provides independent support for the phylogeny of the tropical species.
S244	P. Goldblatt	1990	Phylogeny and classification of the Iridaceae	Annals of the Missouri Botanical Garden	77		607-627				A cladistic analysis of Iridaceae, a family of some 1,630 species and ca. 77 genera, and the closely allied Geosiris and Isophysis, both monotypic and sometimes accorded family status, suggests a phylogony in which there are four major lineages, recognized as subfamilies. Characters used in the analysis include vegetative and floral morphology, anatomy, embryology, pollen ultrastructure, chromosome cytology, and flavonoid and amino acid chemistry. Isophysidoideae, with a superior ovary, include only the Tasmanian Isophysis. Nivenioideae include the Afro-Madagascan Aristea, three woody Cape genera, the Australasian Patersonia, and Geosiris. The last-mentioned. a saprophyte, restricted to Madagascar, appears to be most closely related to Aristea and is not recognized at the tribal level. Iridoideae have four reasonably well differentiated tribes and a worldwide but predominantly southern distribution. The subfamily is specialized in floral and phytochemical features. Ixioideae, which comprise slightly more than half the total species of Iridaceae, are predominantly southern African and have derived leaf anatomy, pollen exine, flavonoids, and inflorescences. Three tribes are recognized in Ixioideae and four in Iridoideae in both of which some subtribal groupings are suggested. Described formally here are Nivenioideae and Pillansieae.
S245	P. Goldblatt;J. Manning	1990	Leaf and corm tunic structure in Lapeirousia (Iridaceae-Ixioideae) in relation to phylogeny and infragenetic classification	Annals of the Missouri Botanical Garden	77		365-374				The tropical and southern African Lapeirousia, comprising 35 species, divides into two subgenera on the basis of leaf type. Leaf anatomy of eight species of Lapeirousia and selected species of the other five genera of Watsonieae was examined and compared with that of the putatively primitive Pillansia. Lapeirousia subg. Lapeirousia has corrugate leaves that lack a distinct midvein and are anatomically specialized in having predominantly or exclusively alternate vascular bundles and square, truncate costal ridges in which the epidermal cells are abruptly enlarged and often heavily thickened in the outer periclinal walls. This derived leaf structure correlates with the specialized woody corm tunics of the subgenus. Subgenus Paniculata has plane leaves with a distinct midvein, vascular bundles usually opposite, and rounded costal ridges with epidermal cells gradually diminishing in size and usually without a heavily thickened outer periclinal wall, the basic type for the tribe. Species of subg. Paniculata also have hard corm tunics composed of densely compacted fibers, the basic type for the clade including Lapeirousia. Several morphological characters within both subgenera of Lapeirousia were used in the construction of a cladogram indicating the major lineages in the genus. This forms the basis for our infrageneric classification that recognizes two subgenera, each with two sections.
S11x5x95c15c48c19	W. J. Kress	1990	The phylogeny and classification of the Zingiberales	Annals of the Missouri Botanical Garden	77		698-721				In the Zingiberales, a primarily tropical order of monocotyledons, most phylogenists currently recognize eight families: Musaceae, Strelitziaceae, Lowiaceae, Heliconiaceae, Zingiberaceae, Costaceae, Cannaceae, and Marantaceae. Some taxonomists still prefer the earlier classifications that included Strelitziaceae, Lowiaceae, and Heliconiaceae in Musaceae s.l., and Costaceae as a part of Zingiberaceae s.l. Attempts to reconstruct the phylogenetic history of the order have been made by Lane, Tomlinson, and Dahlgren & Rasmussen. An original analysis of the evolutionary relationships of the eight families of the Zingiberales based on the principles of phylogenetic systematics is presented here. The most parsimonious topology is (Musaceae (Strelitziaceae (Lowiaceae (Heliconiaceae ((Zingiberaceae, Costaceae) (Cannaceae, Marantaceae)). The cladogram rejects the recognition of Musaceae s.l. as an evolutionary group. A new phylogenetic classification based on the cladogram is proposed that recognizes eight families, two superfamilies, and five suborders within the Zingiberales.
S11x5x95c18c06c16	M. G. Simpson	1990	Phylogeny and classification of the Haemodoraceae	Annals of the Missouri Botanical Garden	77		722-784				A phylogenetic analysis of the monocot family Haemodoraceae is presented to assess the classification and interrelationships of tribes, genera, and species complexes and to determine patterns of evolutionary and biogeographic change. Evidence is reviewed for the monophylesis of the family (as here delimited) and of some family genera. In order to assign character polarities, two families, Philydraceae and Pontederiaceae, were hypothesized as closest outgroups based on presumed synapomorphies shared with the Haemodoraceae, including: (1) unifacial leaves (Philydraceae) and (2) verrucate pollen wall sculpturing and non-tectate-columellate exine structure (Pontederiaceae). A detailed analysis of the selection, definition, and coding of characters and character states is presented. Computer parsimony algorithms were used to construct most parsimonious trees. Utilizing all characters, including several for which polarity could not be determined, two equally most parsimonious cladograms were derived, differing only in the relative placement of the genera Dilatris and Lachnanthes. A cladistic analysis restricted to only those characters for which polarity could be determined yielded the same two equally parsimonious topologies; one in which correlated characters were scaled yielded one of the two topologies. Cladistic analyses support the monophylesis of the (herein defined) tribes Haemodoreae and Conostylideae. However, of the fourteen genera in the family, Wachendorfia, Haemodorum, and, Xiphidium could not be a priori established as monophyletic, and the genera Anigozanthos and Conostylis are paraphyletic. Evolutionary events, as portrayed in the cladograms, are reviewed with emphasis on evolution of trichome anatomy, ovary position, ovule morphology, seed morphology, and chromosome number. Possible biogeographic scenarios support a Gondwanan origin for the Haemodoraceae with one major vicariance event occurring by the continental separation of present Antarctica from South America-Africa. With regard to interfamilial relationships, the Haemodoraceae are hypothesized as the sister group of the family Pontederiaceae, with both families more distantly related to the Philydraceae. Relationships to the Typhales, Bromeliaceae, and Zingiberales are still ambiguous, but the possibility of a close relationship of the Haemodoraceae-Pontederiaceae to the Zingiberales is considered.
S11x4x95c20c11c30	A. A. Anderberg;K. Bremer	1991	Parsimony analysis and cladistic reclassification of the Relhania generic group (Asteraceae-Gnaphalieae)	Annals of the Missouri Botanical Garden	78		1061-1072				Parsimony analysis of the Relhania group of genera (Asteraceae- Gnaphalieae- Relhaniinae) yields a revised hypothesis of their phylogeny. The genera Leysera L. and Oedera L. are demonstrated to have their closest relatives within Relhania L'Her., which is shown to be paraphyletic as hitherto circumscribed. A revised generic classification is proposed. Relhania and Leysera are redefined more narrowly. Rhynchopsidium DC. and the monotypic Nestlera Sprengel are reestablished. Oedera is amended to include some former Relhania species. The new genus Comborhiza Anderb. & Bremer, with 2 species, is described, and 14 new combinations in Oedera and Comborhiza are made. Because parsimony analysis produces better phylogenetic hypotheses than limited selections of alleged synapomorphies, and because the latter approach hitherto has been more common in generic classification, it is argued that, with improved phylogenetic hypotheses derived from parsimony analysis, generic reclassifications will become necessary also in other groups.
S11x5x95c14c40c14	P. Goldblatt;J. E. Henrich	1991	Calydorea Herbert (Iridaceae-Tigridieae): Notes on this New World genus and reduction to synonymy of Salpingostylis, Cardiostigma, Itysa, and Catila	Annals of the Missouri Botanical Garden	78		504-511				Subequal tepals spreading from the base, free stamens, and short slender style branches with simple, obtuse to emarginate apices, the defining generic criteria for the southern South American Calydorea (Iridaceae-Tigridieae) (Herbert, 1843a) also characterize the Florida (U.S.A.) monotypic Salpingostylis (Small, 1931), the Mexican Cardiostigma (Baker, 1876), and the Venezuelan Itysa Ravenna (1986). Salpingostylis and Cardiostigma hardly differ from one another and are congeneric; they can be distinguished from Calydorea only by their secund flower, weakly eccentric style that divides near the apex of the anthers, and short style branches. Itysa also has secund flowers with spreading subequal tepals, free stamens and slender, simple style branches. It is unusual only in having the anthers coherent at their bases and a style that divides above the level of the anthers. Typical Calydorea has upright flowers and a central style that divides near the bases of the anthers into relatively longer style branches that twist weakly so that they come to lie between, rather than opposite, the style branches. We consider the differences between Calydorea, Cardiostigma, Salpingostylis, and Itysa too insignificant to merit generic segregation and unite them all under Calydorea. An unusual species of Calydorea, C. pallens, which has unequal inner and outer tepals and style branches that lie opposite the anthers, is strikingly similar to Catila amabilis (Ravenna, 1983), the latter having somewhat larger and more intensely colored flowers, the anthers of which clasp the style branches after anthesis. These two species belong in the same genus, and we recommend treating both as Calydorea in which we consider them to be relatively unspecialized. Other members of Tigridieae, notably Onira, Eleutherine, and Gelasine, that have free stamens and simple style branches are considered in relation to Calydorea. The phylogenetic position of the species or species clusters of Calydorea are analyzed cladistically and are discussed in relation to other taxa of Tigridieae and the basic character states of the tribe and its sister taxon Mariceae.
S1x29x96c18c56c05	L. J. Hickey;D. W. Taylor	1991	The leaf architecture of Ticodendron and the application of foliar characters in discerning its relationships	Annals of the Missouri Botanical Garden	78		105-130				Leaves of the recently described genus Ticodendron are simple, alternate, stipulate, symmetrical, elliptical with attenuate apices and acute bases, a single order of serrations representing modified rosid teeth, pinnate, craspedodromous principal venation, percurrent tertiaries, well-developed, random areolation, anomocytic stomates, and T-shaped hairs. Phenetic and cladistic analyses of leaf and other characters of Ticodendron were performed in order to determine its affinities and evolutionary relationships. Several new characters, including the number of veins joining the midrib and the venation of the marginal teeth, were added to the suite of standard leaf architectural descriptors because of their demonstrated potential as systematic indicators. After filtering out nonapplicable and symplesiomorphous characters, a total of 70 characters (48 leaf and 22 reproductive and wood) remained. These were organized into two main data sets, with the second further divided to form three subsets, which were then analyzed using a simple similarity comparison and parsimony methods. From the standpoint of its gross phenetic and phylogenetic affinities, Ticodendron belongs to a group of amentiferous taxa, with the extinct genus Fagopsis showing the strongest affinity, followed by Brunellia, Castanopsis, Castanea, Alnus, and Nothofagus. Our cladistic analyses show Ticodendron grouping with the Fagales and occasionally with the Myricaceae in a rosalean clade whose base is embedded in the Cunoniaceae. These data support recognition of the new genus as a member of a distinct family in the order Fagales and with closest affinities to Fagaceae and Betulaceae.
S2x3x96c16c52c27	R. N. Schwarzwalder;D. L. Dilcher	1991	Systematic placement of the Plantaceae in the Hamamelidae	Annals of the Missouri Botanical Garden	78		962-969				A cladistic analysis of the basal Hamamelidae based upon 92 characters is presented. The results support a close phylogenetic relationship between the subfamily Altingioideae (Hamamelidaceae) and Plantanaceae but suggest that present hypotheses concerning the derivation of the Hamamelidae from the Magnoliidae need revision. Analysis of the five subfamilies of Hamamelidaceae using Plantanaceae as an outgroup yields a phylogeny that corresponds to the fossil record far better than does current theory. As a result of this study and recent paloebotanical and phytochemical evidence, it is suggested that Hamamelidae are at least as primitive as Magnoliidae.
S11x5x95c20c11c17	M. J. Donoghue;R. G. Olmstead;J. F. Smith;J. D. Palmer	1992	Phylogenetic relationships of Dipsacales based on rbcL sequences	Annals of the Missouri Botanical Garden	79		333-345				Nucleotide sequences of the chloroplast gene rbcL were obtained from Lonicera, Sambucus, Adoxa, and Cornus. Phylogenetic analyses of these sequences, along with previously sequenced Dipsacales and placeholders for other Asteridae and Rosidae, lead to the following conclusions: (1) the genera of Caprifoliaceae (in any traditional sense) do not form a monophyletic group; (2) Symphoricarpos and Lonicera (representing Caprifoliaceae sens. str.) are related and are united with Valerianaceae and Dipsacaceae; and (3) Adoxa and Sambucus are directly linked and are possibly related to Viburnum. Our analyses also cast doubt on the monophyly of Dipsacales and Asteridae. These findings are generally congruent with other molecular results and with hypotheses based on morphological data.
S2x7x96c15c21c45	L. Hufford	1992	Rosidae and their relationships to other nonmagnoliid dicotyledons: A phylogenetic analysis using morphological and chemical data	Annals of the Missouri Botanical Garden	79		218-248				Parsimony analysis was used to develop phylogenetic hypotheses for Rosidae and other nonmagnoliid dicotyledons, especially Asteridae. Rosidae were placed among lower Hamamelidae as the sister group of Platanus and Hamamelidaceae. Higher Hamamelidae (Fagales, Juglandales, and Casuarinaceae), Dilleniidae, and Asteridae nest within a paraphyletic Rosidae. With some expansion, the traditional Asteridae are monophyletic. For example, the problematic Columellia was placed among Asteridae as the sister group of Caprifoliaceae. Asteridae were placed as the sister group of Ericales among rosids circumscribed as Corniflorae in recent classifications of Dahlgren. Special attention was given to problematic groups that have been allied variously with Asteridae, Dilleniidae, and Rosidae. For example, Actinidiaceae and Fouquieriaceae were placed among Ericales. Loasaceae and Sarraceniaceae formed the sister group of Hydrangeaceae in the Corniflorae grade of Rosidae. Dilleniidae were not monophyletic. For example, Paeonia was placed as the sister taxon of the rest of the Rosidae (including dilleniids and asterids), and Ochnaceae as the sister taxon of Linales. Dilleniaceae and Theaceae form a monophyletic group with Paracryphia placed as the sister group of Rhizophoraceae and Anisophylleaceae.
S11x5x95c20c03c28	E. Conti;A. Fischbach;K. J. Sytsma	1993	Tribal relationships in Onagraceae: Implications from rbcL sequence data	Annals of the Missouri Botanical Garden	80		672-685				The evolutionary relationships among the seven tribes of Onagraceae, the most intensively studied family of intermediate size, have been examined from morphological and molecular perspectives. Previous cladistic analyses of chloroplast (cp) and nuclear ribosomal (nr) DNA restriction sites, nuclear-encoded rbcS amino acid sequences, nrRNA nucleotide sequences, and morphological characters, produced trees that agree in defining the tribe Jussiaeeae as the sister group to the rest of the family. However, the relationships among the rest of the tribes are not completely resolved by these analyses. Cladistic analyses of sequence data from the chloroplast encoded rbcL gene produced results that bear on two major issues: (i) intertribal relationships within Onagraceae, and (ii) congruence with other cladistic analyses. Sequences of rbcL were obtained from all tribes of Onagraceae and from three families that have been proposed as sister taxa of Onagraceae on the basis of other molecular and morphological evidence (Lythraceae, Punicaceae, Trapaceae). Phylogenetic analysis of rbcL sequence data produced a single most parsimonious tree, both Fitch and weighted, that defines three strongly supported monophyletic groups within the family: all tribes except Jussiaeeae; Onagreae and Epilobieae; and, most interestingly, Fuchsieae and Circaeeae. The formation of this last clade corroborates the results of the cpDNA restriction site and of the nrRNA sequence data. The data also indicate an apparent slowdown in the rate of rbcL sequence divergence in the woody Fuchsia lineage relative to the herbaceous Circaea lineage. The placements of monogeneric tribes Lopezieae and Hauyeae are not strongly supported. The topology of the rbcL tree basically confirms that of the cpDNA restriction site tree. Among the other cladistic analyses, the nrRNA sequence survey produced the tree closest to the rbcL tree, followed in order by the rbcS amino acid sequence tree, the nrDNA restriction site tree, and the morphological tree
S2x7x96c18c15c22	K. A. Kron;M. W. Chase	1993	Systematics of the Ericaceae, Empetraceae, Epacridaceae and related taxa based upon rbcL sequence data	Annals of the Missouri Botanical Garden	80		735-741				The Ericaceae, Epacridaceae, and Empetraceae are usually recognized as closely related families of woody plants that share a preference for acidic soils, anthers that invert in development, and the presence of endosperm haustoria, among other characteristics. The Empetraceae are recognized as distinctive because of their often unisexual and wind-pollinated flowers. Epacridaceae are distinguished from Ericaceae by anthers that open by slits rather than pores and a primarily Australian distribution. Phylogenetic relationships of these related families are investigated using nucleotide sequences of the plastid gene rbcL. Parsimony analyses indicate a monophyletic, broadly defined Ericaceae that includes Empetraceae and Epacridaceae.
S2x6x96c18c05c55	R. G. Olmstead;B. Bremer;K. M. Scott;J. D. Palmer	1993	A parsimony analysis of the Asteridae sensu lato based on rbcL sequences	Annals of the Missouri Botanical Garden	80		700-722				A parsimony analysis of 156 representative sequences of the Asteridae sensu lato and 28 outgroup sequences was conducted using a two-tiered approach. First, an analysis of the entire group, including 105 sequences, examined relationships among major lineages within the Asteridae s.l.; subsequently, several clades within the larger group were examined individually in greater detail by including more sequences for the group in question. The search strategy was designed to discover multiple islands of equal parsimony using the heuristic search routine in PAUP. In the broad search and in each more detailed search of subclades, multiple islands were found that imply substantially different relationships. The results suggest a monophvletic Asteridae s.l., comprising the Ericales, Primulales, Ebenales and relatives of the Dilleniidae sensu Cronquist; Cornales, Apiales, and Hydrangeaceae of the Rosidae sensu Cronquist; and the conventionally circumscribed Asteridae. Within the Asteridae s.l., 11 groups were congruent between islands and are designated as follows: (1) Cornales, (2) ericalean clade, (3) Garrya clade, (4) Ilex clade, (5) Apiales, (6) Dipsacales, (7) Asterales s.l., (8) Gentianales, (9) Solanales, (10) Boraginales; and (11) Lamiales s.l. The only grouping between the level of these 11 clades and the whole Asteridae s.l. that is congruent between islands is the clade consisting of the Gentianales, Solanales, Boraginales, and Lamiales s.l., i.e., the Lamiidae of Takhtajan.
S2x7x96c17c42c41	R. A. Price;J. D. Palmer	1993	Phylogenetic relationships of the Geraniaceae and Geraniales from rbcL sequence comparisons	Annals of the Missouri Botanical Garden	80		661-671				Parsimony analyses of DNA sequence data from the chloroplast rbcL gene were used to assess the circumscription and phylogenetic position of the Geraniaceae, generic relationships within the family, and the affinities of the families previously assigned to the order Geraniales. The other families placed in the Geraniales in recent higher order classifications fall into four well separated lineages, none of which apprears to be closely related to the Geraniaceae. Only Hypseocharis, often included in the Oxalidaceae, receives strong support as a close relative to the monophyletic Geraniaceae sens. str., as suggested by Boesewinkel on the basis of seed anatomy. Sequence comparisons of rbcL provide the first highly resolved phylogeny of the Geraniaceae, indicating that Pelargonium is a sister group to the remainder of the family, that Erodium and Geranium are probable sister genera, and that Monsonia and Sarcocaulon are either sister genera or are congeneric.
S402	N. D. Young;K. E. Steiner;C. W. dePamphilis	1999	The evolution of parasitism in Scrophulariaceae/Orobanchaceae: plastid gene sequences refute an evolutionary transition series	Annals of the Missouri Botanical Garden	86	4	876-893		http://www.jstor.org/stable/2666173		Parasitic plants in Scrophulariaceae and Orobanchaceae have been traditionally depicted as forming a linear evolutionary series beginning with hemiparasitism and ending with holoparasitism. The genera Lathraea, Harveya, and Hyobanche have been viewed as transitional links between the parasitic members of Scrophulariaceae and the strictly holoparasitic habit of the traditional Orobanchaceae. Phylogenetic analyses of plastid rps2 and matK sequences were performed. The transitional genera are not transitional to the traditional Orobanchaceae, but represent multiple independent origins of holoparasitism. Within Scrophulariaceae, the two traditional subfamilies Rhinanthoideae and Antirrhinoideae are defined by the arrangement of the corolla lobes during aestivation. However, neither of the two subfamilies is monophyletic in our analyses, suggesting that corolla lobe position is a homoplastic character. While the traditional Orobanchaceae are monophyletic, tribes Buchnereae and Rhinantheae are clearly not, and genus Orobanche probably is not. Clades of parasitic genera correspond well with biogeographic provinces. One strongly supported clade contains the parasitic Scrophulariaceae, the traditional Orobanchaceae, and Lindenbergia. It is proposed that this clade be defined as the Orobanchaceae.
S501	K. G. Karol;Y. Suh;G. E. Schatz;E. A. Zimmer	2000	Molecular evidence for the phylogenetic position of Takhtajania in the Winteraceae: inference from nuclear ribosomal and chloroplast gene spacer sequences	Annals of the Missouri Botanical Garden	87	3	414-432		http://www.jstor.org/stable/2666200	Canellaceae; combined data; cpDNA; ITS; likelihood; phylogeny; Takhtajania; Winteraceae	The nucleotide sequences of the internal transcribed spacers (ITS 1 and ITS 2) and 5.8S coding region of nuclear ribosomal DNA, as well as the noncoding trnL-trnF spacer regions of the chloroplast DNA, were determined and analyzed to estimate the phylogenetic position of Takhtajania perrieri within the Winteraceae. Using representatives of each genus of Canellaceae as outgroups (Canella, Capsicodendron, Cinnamodendron, Cinnomosma, Pleodendron, and Warburgia), both maximum parsimony and maximum likelihood analyses place Takhtajania in a basal position sister to the remainder of the Winteraceae. Although the overall topology within the Winteraceae was mostly congruent between nuclear and chloroplast data sets, the trnL-trnF data resulted in lower support values in comparison to the ITS data, and failed to resolve basal relationships in the family, yielding alternative equally parsimonious solutions. The combined nuclear/chloroplast data set resulted in a single tree identical to that generated by nuclear data alone, but demonstrated strengthened support for a basal branch leading to Takhtajania, as well as for the position of Tasmannia as the next branch within the family. Potentially conflicting signals from nuclear and chloroplast data indicate that further taxon sampling or additional sequence data may be required to infer infrafamilial phylogenetic relationships for Canellaceae.
S623	S. J. Wagstaff;M. J. Bayly;P. J. Garnock-Jones;D. C. Albach	2002	Classification, origin, and diversification of the New Zealand hebes (Scrophulariaceae)	Annals of the Missouri Botanical Garden	89	1	38-63		http://www.jstor.org/stable/3298656	Hebe; ITS; New Zealand; phylogenetic analysis; rbcL; Scrophulariaceae; Veronica	The New Zealand hebes (Scrophulariaceae) are members of a large Southern Hemisphere clade nested within Veronica. Analysis of ITS and rbcL sequences suggests that the New Zealand species are derived from a single common ancestor that arrived via long-distance dispersal. After the establishment of this initial founder population in New Zealand, the hebes have undergone at least two major episodes of diversification, giving rise to six clades. The great degree of morphological diversity in the New Zealand hebes contrasts with a corresponding low level of sequence divergence. New Zealand was a source of new emigrants to other regions in the South Pacific that were preadapted to high mountains or forest margins. Our results suggest that two instances of long-distance dispersal from New Zealand to South America, at least one instance from New Zealand to Australia, and one instance from New Zealand to New Guinea have occurred relatively recently. Shorter hops to the Chatham Islands and the subantarctic islands are also supported by the sequence data.
S1600	D. Goyder;A. Nicholas;S. Liede-Schumann	2006	Phylogenetic relationships in subtribe Asclepiadinae (Apocynaceae: Asclepiadoideae)	Annals of the Missouri Botanical Garden							A first approximation of evolutionary relationships within the Asclepiadinae (Apocynaceae: Asclepiadoideae) is inferred from two DNA datasets, from the nuclear ITS region, and from plastid trnT-L & trnL-F spacers & trnL intron. Both the subtribe as a whole, and the phylogenetic radiation of largely herbaceous genera around Asclepias are monophyletic and well supported. While resolution within the Asclepias complex is limited, the lineages identified demonstrate that current generic delimitation is unsatisfactory. Asclepias should either be restricted to New World members of the subtribe, or expanded to encompass the entire radiation. In the African species, it is shown that although the corona is taxonomically important for recognizing species, it can be misleading as an indicator of phylogenetic relationship. Vegetative similarities often prove a more reliable guide, but more detailed studies are needed to refine these lineages and to detect morphological characters to aid in their practical recognition.
S1774	T. Livshultz;D. Middleton;M. E. Endress;J. K. Williams	2007	Phylogeny of Apocynoideae and the APSA clade (Apocynaceae s.l.)	Annals of the Missouri Botanical Garden							Phylogenetic relationships were reconstructed among 59 of 77 genera of subfamily Apocynoideae and exemplars of Periplocoideae, Secamonoideae, and Asclepiadoideae (collectively the APSA clade) using sequences from four regions of the chloroplast genome (trnL intron and trnL-trnF spacer, rpl16 intron, rps16 intron, matK and 3' half of trnK intron) and 16 morphological characters. Apocynoideae are resolved as paraphyletic. The five tribes recognized within this subfamily in the classification of Endress & Bruyns (2000) are all para- or polyphyletic. Seven major clades of Apocynoideae are identified. The first three include genera classified predominantly in tribes Wrightieae and Malouetieae sensu Endress & Bruyns and form a paraphyletic grade to a crown clade. The crown clade includes four clades of Apocynoideae genera classified in tribes Apocyneae, Mesechiteae, and Echiteae together with Periplocoideae, Secamonoideae, and Asclepiadoideae; the latter three constitute the traditional Asclepiadaceae. Asclepiadaceae are resolved as polyphyletic, although the node that precludes a paraphyletic Asclepiadaceae does not have bootstrap support. The clade of Secamonoideae + Asclepiadoideae is well supported as sister to a clade of three African Apocynoideae genera (Baissea, Motandra, and Oncinotis). There is a strong correlation between geographic distribution and phylogeny among crown clade Apocynoideae. A New World clade is composed of American genera plus the predominantly Australasian Parsonsia and Artia. An Asian clade is composed of Asian, Malesian, and Australasian genera plus the north temperate Apocynum. Trachelospermum is polyphyletic with American and Asian species nested in the New World and Asian clades, respectively. The implications of this phylogeny for the evolution of pollen aggregation and mass transfer, the traits that were used to separate Asclepiadaceae from Apocynaceae s.str., are discussed.
S1710	U. Meve;S. Liede-Schumann	2007	Ceropegia L. (Apocynaceae-Ceropegieae-Stapeliinae): paraphyletic but still taxonomically sound	Annals of the Missouri Botanical Garden							Even though the species-rich genus Ceropegia is convincingly characterized by its pitfall flowers, investigation of non-coding markers of cpDNA (trnT-L and trnL-F spacers, and the trnL intron) and nrDNA (ITS) has shown that Ceropegia is twice paraphyletic. The 36 analyzed Ceropegia taxa are scattered over a grade of seven clades. One clade is shared by some Ceropegia and all Brachystelma species investigated, making Ceropegia (without Brachystelma) paraphyletic. All endemic Madagascan Ceropegia taxa investigated and the East African C. robynsiana share a terminal, but in most analyses unresolved clade with the stapeliads. Thus, again, Ceropegia without the stapeliads, is paraphyletic. These results are incongruent with current taxonomy. In absence of adequate morphological, anatomical or karyological characters supporting a taxonomical reclassification of the genus in accordance to the retrieved clades of the phylogenetic analysis, it is proposed to classify Ceropegia as a „morphogenus‰ and to hold on to the current taxonomy.
S2437	S. J. Wagstaff;M. I. Dawson;S. Venter;J. Munzinger;D. M. Crayn;D. A. Steane;K. L. Lemson	2010	Origin, Diversification, and Classification of the Australasian Genus Dracophyllum (Richeeae, Ericaceae)	Annals of the Missouri Botanical Garden	97	2	235-258	10.3417/2008130			The genus Dracophyllum (Ericaceae) has a fragmented distribution in Australasia, but reaches the greatest level of species richness and morphological diversity in New Zealand. We investigated evolutionary processes that contribute to this disparity in species richness by comparing DNA sequences from members of Dracophyllum, its close relatives Richea and Sphenotoma (together constituting Tribe Richeeae), along with more distant relatives in the Ericaceae. We created complementary data sets for the chloroplast-encoded genes matK and rbcL. Both Bayesian and maximum likelihood analyses were conducted to assess the robustness of our phylogenetic inferences. The results were largely congruent and when analyzed in combination provided greater resolution. In our analyses, Tribe Richeeae formed a monophyletic group that diverged during the Eocene (at least 33.3 Ma) with a crown radiation during the early Miocene (at least 16.5 Ma) that resulted in two disjunct lineages. This date corresponds roughly to the onset of aridification in central Australia. The Western Australian genus Sphenotoma formed an isolated evolutionary lineage, while Dracophyllum and Richea together formed a second lineage restricted to Eastern Australia, Lord Howe Island, New Caledonia and New Zealand. The relationships of the Tasmanian endemic, Dracophyllum milliganii, remain an enigma. It was ambiguously placed in our analyses either emerging as sister to Sphenotoma or to the Dracophyllum/Richea clade. Richea was polyphyletic; we recovered two distinct lineages of Richea, traditionally recognized as R. sect. Cystanthe and R. sect. Dracophylloides; these were nested within Dracophyllum. Because Richea is polyphyletic, the status of this genus (and the respective infrageneric classifications of Dracophyllum and Richea) may be equivocal. The New Caledonian and New Zealand species of Dracophyllum dispersed from Australia; we document two independent episodes of long-distance dispersal in the late Miocene to early Pliocene. Low levels of sequence divergence suggest a rapid and recent species radiation in these two island archipelagos largely within the last 3--6 million years. This radiation accompanied Pliocene uplift of the New Zealand Southern Alps and episodes of glaciation during the Pleistocene. Key words:adaptive radiation, age, angiosperm, Australia, biogeography, classification, diversification, Dracophyllum, Ericaceae, island floras, Lord Howe Island, matK, molecular clock, molecular phylogenetics, molecular sequence data, molecular systematics, New Caledonia, New Zealand, phylogeny, plant evolution, rbcL, Richea, speciation, species richness, Sphenotoma, Tasmania.
S1632	A. M. C. Tang;R. Jeewon;K. D. Hyde	2006	Phylogenetic utility of protein (RPB2, B-tubulin) and ribosomal (LSU, SSU) gene sequences in the systematics of Sordariomycetes	Antonie van Leeuwenhoek International Journal of General and Molecular Microbiology							The Sordariomycetes is an important group of fungi whose taxonomic relationships and classification is obscure. There is presently no multigene molecular phylogeny that addresses evolutionary relationships among different classes and orders. In this study, phylogenetic analyses with a broad taxon sampling of the Sordariomycetes were conducted to evaluate the utility of four gene regions (LSU rDNA, SSU rDNA, beta-tubulin and RPB2) for inferring evolutionary relationships at different taxonomic ranks. Single and multi-gene genealogies inferred from Bayesian and Maximum Parsimony analyses were compared in individual and combined datasets. At the subclass level, SSU rDNA phylogenies demonstrate their utility as a marker to infer phylogenetic relationships at higher levels. All analyses with SSU rDNA alone, combined LSU rDNA and SSU rDNA, and the combined 28S rDNA, SSU rDNA and RPB2 datasets resulted in three subclasses: Hypocreomycetidae, Sordariomycetidae and Xylariomycetidae, which correspond well to established morphological classification schemes. At the ordinal level, the best resolved phylogeny was obtained from the combined LSU rDNA and SSU rDNA datasets. Individually, the RPB2 gene dataset resulted in significantly higher number of parsimony informative characters. Our results supported the recent separation of Boliniaceae, Chaetosphaeriaceae and Coniochaetaceae from Sordariales and placement of Coronophorales in Hypocreomycetidae. Microascales was found to be paraphyletic and Ceratocystis is phylogenetically associated to Faurelina, while Microascus and Petriella formed another clade and basal to other members of Halosphaeriales. In addition, the order Lulworthiales does not appear to fit in any of the three subclasses. Congruence between morphological and molecular classification schemes is discussed.
S2312	Y. Ferdman;V. Kagan-Zur	2009	Examination of molecular markers and physiological traits reveals at least two constant genotypes in the Terfezia boudieri truffle population of the Negev desert	Antonie van Leeuwenhoek International Journal of General and Molecular Microbiology							Phylogenetic analyses have corroborated the discovery of three internal transcribed spacer (ITS) types in Terfezia boudieri isolates in the course of an earlier study in our lab and have emphasized the divergence of type 2 from types 1 and 3. The present paper describes the application of molecular and physiological tools to investigate the possible existence of cryptic species within T. boudieri. The markers used include sequences taken from the 5' end of the ribosomal large subunit gene, a chitin synthase partial sequence, &#946;-tubulin partial sequence and amplified fragment length polymorphism (AFLP)-based markers. The markers divided the isolates into three groups, each correlated to an ITS type. Over 100 fruit bodies, among which each ITS type was represented in at least 30 specimens, were tested with each of the markers. Three of the physiological traits examined: initial growth, mycelial proliferation and mycorrhiza formation, consistently showed responses paralleling ITS type; the results presented support the division of T. boudieri into three cryptic species.
S467	R. F. Sullivan;J. F. White Jr	2000	Phoma glomerata as a mycoparasite of powdery mildew	Applied and Environmental Microbiology	66	1	425-427		http://aem.asm.org/cgi/content/full/66/1/425		Ampelomyces and Phoma species are frequently confused with each other. Isolates previously attributed to the genus Ampelomyces were shown to be Phoma isolates through studies of their morphology and life cycle and ribosomal DNA internal transcribed spacer region 1 sequence analysis. Phoma glomerata can colonize and suppress development of powdery mildew on oak and may have utility as a mycoparasitic agent.
S1158	B. J. Campbell;S. C. Cary	2004	Abundance of Reverse Tricarboxylic Acid Cycle Genes in Free-Living Microorganisms at Deep-Sea Hydrothermal Vents	Applied and Environmental Microbiology	70						Since the discovery of hydrothermal vents over 25 years ago, the Calvin-Bassham-Benson (Calvin) cycle has been considered to be the principal carbon fixation pathway in this microbial-based ecosystem. However, based on recent molecular data of cultured free-living and non-cultured episymbiotic members of the epsilon subdivision of Proteobacteria and earlier carbon isotope data of primary consumers, an alternative autotrophic pathway may predominate. Here, genetic and culture-based approaches demonstrated the abundance of the reverse tricarboxylic acid cycle compared to the Calvin cycle in microbial communities from two geographically distinct deep-sea hydrothermal vents. PCR with degenerate primers for three key genes in the reverse tricarboxylic acid cycle as well as form I and form II of ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase (Calvin cycle marker gene) was utilized to demonstrate the abundance of the reverse tricarboxylic acid cycle in diverse vent samples. These genes were also expressed in at least one chimney sample. Diversity, similarity matrix and phylogenetic analyses of cloned samples as well as amplified gene products from autotrophic enrichment cultures suggest that the majority of autotrophs that utilize the reverse tricarboxylic acid cycle are members of the epsilon Proteobacteria. These results parallel previously published 16S molecular surveys which demonstrate the dominance of epsilon Proteobacteria in free-living hydrothermal vent communities. Epsilon Proteobacteria are ubiquitous in many other microaerophilic to anaerobic sulfidic environments as well, such as the deep subsurface. Therefore, the reverse tricarboxylic acid cycle may be a major autotrophic pathway in these environments and significantly contribute to global autotrophic processes.
S1100	T. H. de Koker;M. D. Muzuch;D. Cullen;J. Gaskell;P. J. Kersten	2004	Pyranose 2-oxidase from Phanerochaete chrysosporium: Isolation from solid substrate, protein purification, and characterization of gene structure and regulation	Applied and Environmental Microbiology							Pyranose 2-oxidase (POX) was recovered from Phanerochaete chrysosporium BKM-F-1767 solid substrate culture using mild extraction conditions and purified. 13CNMR confirmed production of Darabino-hexos-2-ulose (glucosone) from Dglucose with the oxidase. Peptide fingerprints generated by LCMS/MS of tryptic digests and analysis of the corresponding cDNA revealed a structurally unusual sequence for the P. chrysosporium POX. Relatively high levels of pox transcript were detected under carbon-starved culture conditions but not under nutrient-sufficiency. This regulation pattern is similar to that observed for lignin peroxidases, manganese peroxidases and glyoxal oxidase of P. chrysosporium, supporting evidence that POX has a role in lignocellulose degradation.
S1577	M. D. J. Lynch;R. G. Thorn	2006	Diversity of Basidiomycetes in Michigan Agricultural Soils	Applied and Environmental Microbiology							We analyzed the composition of communities of soil basidiomycetes in agroecosystems that differ in tillage history at the Kellogg Biological Station Long Term Ecological Research site near Battle Creek, Michigan. The approach combined soil DNA extraction through a bead-beating method modified to increase recovery of fungal DNA, PCR amplification with basidiomycete-specific primers, cloning and RFLP screening of mixed PCR products, and sequencing of unique clones. Much greater diversity was detected than was anticipated in this habitat on the basis of culture-based methods or surveys of fruiting bodies. With 'species' defined as organisms yielding PCR products with > 99% identity in the 5' 650 bases of the nuclear large subunit ribosomal DNA, 241 species were detected among 409 unique basidiomycete sequences recovered. Almost all major clades of basidiomycetes from basidiomycetous yeasts and other heterobasidiomycetes through polypores and euagarics were represented, with a majority from the latter clade. Only 24 of 241 species had 99% or greater sequence similarity to named reference sequences in GenBank, and several clades with multiple species could not be identified at the genus level by phylogenetic comparisons with named sequences. The total estimated species richness for this 11.2 ha site was 367 species of basidiomycetes.
S1664	J. M. Allen;D. L. Reed;M. A. Perotti;H. R. Braig	2007	Evolutionary relationships of Candidatus Riesia spp., endosymbiotic Enterobacteriaceae living within hematophagous primate lice	Applied and Environmental Microbiology	73	5	1659-1664	10.1128/AEM.01877-06			The primary endosymbiont of the human head/body louse (Pediculus humanus) was recently described as Candidatus Riesia pediculicola. We have confirmed the charactization of the P-endosymbiont from P. humanus, and provide new characterizations of the P-endosymbionts from Pediculus schaeffi from chimpanzees and Pthirus pubis from humans. The endosymbionts showed an average percent sequence divergence of 11% from the most closely related known bacterium Candidatus Arsenophonus insecticola. We propose that two additional species be added to the genus Candidatus Riesia. The new species proposed within Candidatus Riesia have sequence divergences of 3.4% and 9.0% based on uncorrected pairwise differences. Our Bayesian analysis shows that the branching pattern for the primary endosymbionts was the same as that for their louse hosts, suggesting a long coevoluionary history between primate lice and their primary endosymbionts. We used a calibration of 5.6 million years to date the divergence between endosymbionts from human and primate lice and got a evolutionary rate of nucleotide substitution of 0.67% per million years, which is 15-30 times faster than previous estimates calculated for Buchnera, the primary endosymbiont in Aphids. Given the evidence for cospeciation with primate lice, and the evidence for fast evolutionary rates, this lineage of endosymbiotic bacteria can be evaluated as a fast-evolving marker of both louse and primate evolutionary history.
S2481	A. M. Estes;D. J. Hearn;J. L. Bronstein;E. A. Pierson	2009	The olive fly endosymbiont, "Candidatus Erwinia dacicola", switches from an intracellular to an extracellular existence during host insect development	Applied and Environmental Microbiology	75	22	7097-7106	10.1128/aem.00778-09			As polyphagous, holometabolous insects, Tephritid fruit flies (Diptera: Tephritidae) pose a unique habitat for endosymbiotic bacteria, especially those microbes associated with the digestive system. Here we examine the endosymbiont of the olive fly (Bactrocera oleae (Rossi) Diptera: Tephritidae), a tephritid of significant economic importance. "Candidatus Erwinia dacicola" was found in the digestive system of all life stages of wild olive flies from the southwestern United States. PCR and microscopy demonstrated that "Ca. Erwinia dacicola" resided intracellularly in the gastric caeca of the larval midgut, but extracellularly in the lumen of the foregut and ovipositor diverticulum of adult flies. "Ca. Erwinia dacicola" is one of the few non-pathogenic endosymbionts that transitions between intracellular and extracellular lifestyles during specific stages of the host's life cycle. Another unique feature of the olive fly endosymbiont is that unlike obligate endosymbionts of monophagous insects, "Ca. Erwinia dacicola" has a G+C nucleotide composition similar to that of closely-related plant pathogenic and free-living bacteria. Transitioning between intracellular-extracellular lifestyles and a G+C nucleotide composition similar to that of free-living relatives may be two characteristics "Ca. Erwinia dacicola" posses to facilitate survival in a changing environment during the development of a polyphagous, holometabolous host. We propose that insect-bacterial symbioses should be classified based on the environment that the host provides the endosymbiont (the endosymbiont environment).
S2063	M. L. Guillemin;S. A. Akki;T. Givernaud;A. Mouradi;M. Valero;C. Destombe	2008	Molecular characterisation and development of rapid molecular methods to identify species of Gracilariaceae from the Atlantic coast of Morocco	Aquatic Botany				10.1016/j.aquabot.2008.03.008			In Gracilariaceae, species identification is traditionally based on gross morphology; therefore taxonomic status of terete individuals remains frequently problematic due to the high morphological plasticity. Different morphological species have been recorded along the Atlantic coast of Morocco; however, no clear diagnostic characters were available to discriminate between cylindrical species. In this study, molecular markers were used to characterize species. The sequence of the Rubisco spacer allowed identification of six species of Gracilariaceae: G. gracilis, G. dura, G. conferta, G. vermiculophylla and G. multipartita and Gracilariopsis longissima. In order to identify species with certainty, two simple and rapid methods based on the amplification of rDNA ITS and PCR-RFPL of the large subunit of the Rubisco were developed.
S1693	E. Hegewald;J. Padisák;T. Friedl	2007	Pseudotetraëdriella kamillae a new genus and species of Eustigmatophyceae	Archiv für Hydrobiologie							A new genus Pseudotetraedriella E. Hegewald gen. nov. and species Pseudotetraedriella kamillae E. Hegewald et J. Padisák spec. nov. are described. The species differs markedly from the described species with tetralobular shape (Tetraedron (Chlorophyta), Tetraedriella(Xanthophyceae). 18S rDNA sequence analyses demonstrate its close relationship with a morphologically rather different species, Monodopsis subterranea, within the class Eustigmatophyceae (Heterokontophyta). Ecological features of the newly described species are also discussed.
S1219	J. Munshi-South;G. S. Wilkinson	2005	Diet influences life span in parrots (Order: Psittaciformes)	Auk							Evolutionary hypotheses for exceptional longevity predict that life span should increase as extrinsic mortality rates decrease. Specifically, a decline in age-specific survival and fertility should evolve and decrease life span in proportion to the magnitude of the mortality risk. We examine these ideas using a new dataset on maximum longevity, ecology, and life history of 162 parrot species (Order: Psittaciformes). Parrots are generally long-lived but exhibit remarkable variation in life span between similar-sized genera, with particularly long-lived species occurring in the Cacatua, Calyptorhynchus, and Amazona genera. After controlling for both body size and phylogenetic ancestry using a phylogenetic supertree of all 352 parrot species, type of diet and communal roosting explain significant variation in parrot life span. The influence of communal roosting on longevity is statistically dependent on an association with diet type. We suggest that extreme longevity in parrots has evolved in response to species-specific characteristics of diet, habitat, and behavior that influence extrinsic mortality rates.
S2001	H. R. L. Lerner;M. C. Klaver;D. P. Mindell	2008	Molecular Phylogenetics of the Buteonine Birds of Prey (Accipitridae)	Auk							Phylogenetic relationships among birds of prey in the Accipitridae subfamily Buteoninae are not fully established but are of particular interest because Buteoninae constitutes one of the largest accipitrid subgroups and includes multiple species of conservation concern. Genera previously included within the Buteoninae are Buteo, Leucopternis, Buteogallus, Harpyhaliaetus, Busarellus, Parabuteo, Geranoaetus, Geranospiza, Ictinia, Rostrhamus, Kaupifalco, and Butastur. We analyzed representatives from all buteonine genera and most non-Buteo (i.e., â•˛sub-buteoâ•ˇ) species with >3,000 bases of nuclear and mitochondrial DNA and found non-monophyly for the nominal genera Buteo, Buteogallus, and Leucopternis. The Old World Lizard Buzzard (Kaupifalco monogrammicus) is not closely related to buteonine taxa but is sister to goshawks in the genera Melierax, Micronisus, and Urotriorchis. Another Old World genus, Butastur, is sister to the clade including all other buteonine genera mentioned above. Investigation of several â•˛superspeciesâ•ˇ complexes within the genus Leucopternis revealed non-monophyly for the four subspecies of White Hawk (L. albicollis). On the basis of mitochondrial data, L. a. albicollis forms a clade with L. polionotus, whereas L. a. costaricensis, L. a. ghiesbreghti, and L. a. williaminae form a clade with L. occidentalis. Among taxa included as outgroups, we found two species in the genus Circus to be clearly nested within a clade of Accipiter spp.
S2165	B. J. Rees;A. Marchant;G. C. Zuccarello	2004	A tale of two species - possible origins of red to purple-coloured Gymnopilus species in Europe	Australasian Mycologist	22	2	57-72				Reports of exotic purple-coloured Gymnopilus species from separate locations in Europe have sparked interest in whether the species are native to the areas where they are found, or have been introduced recently with wood or with plants. Four of these collections have been investigated by morphological and also molecular means where possible, and compared with similar species from the Southern Hemisphere. Although some variation in character states is present, both sets of data confirm the presence of two separate, but closely related species Gymnopilus dilepis and Gymnopilus purpuratus both of which are also found in Australia. Gymnopilus mullaunius from Australia is reduced to synonymy with Gymnopilus purpuratus.
S961	L. Mostert;F. Halleen;M. L. Creaser;P. W. C. Crous	2003	Cryptovalsa ampelina, a forgotten shoot and cane pathogen of grapevines	Australasian Plant Pathology	33	2	295-299	10.1071/ap03095			A diatrypaceous ascomycete with polysporous asci and reniform to allantoid, pigmented ascospores, was commonly isolated from grapevine canes in South Africa and Australia. The fungus was identified as Cryptovalsa ampelina based on its characteristic morphology. Subsequent phylogenetic analyses confirmed this species to belong to the Diatrypaceae. To elucidate its status as potential pathogen, pathogenicity was also confirmed by means of wound inoculations on grapevine canes.
S1075	B. D. Wingfield;L. Ericson;T. Szaro;J. J. Burdon	2004	Phylogenetic patterns in the Uredinales	Australasian Plant Pathology	33	3	327-335	10.1071/ap04020			Rusts (Basidiomycetes: Uredinales) are a large, diverse group of obligate biotrophic fungi that include many important plant pathogens. Phylogenetic relationships within the group are poorly understood, with between two and fourteen families being recognized on morphological and host taxonomic grounds. We report the first analysis of broad-scale relationships within the Uredinales using DNA sequence data from the small subunit gene of the ribosomal RNA operon. A major split is obvious between genera that have aecial stages on gymnosperm hosts and those with this stage on angiosperms. This finding is in accord with the early taxonomic two-family treatments of the Uredinales. Within the major clades there is evidence of incongruency with morphologically defined families. Racospermyces Maravalia, Hemileia and Caeoma are basal to the major phylogenetic sub-division and probably represent the most ancient rust lineages. Using these sequence data we estimate that the rusts diverged from their closest relatives around 150 million years ago.
S1417	T. I. Burgess;P. A. Barber;G. E. S. J. Hardy	2005	Botryosphaeria spp. associated with eucalypts in Western Australia, including the description of Fusicoccum macroclavatum sp. nov	Australasian Plant Pathology	34	4	557-567				Botryosphaeria spp. are common endophytes and canker pathogens of many woody plants including eucalypts. Eucalyptus globulus, endemic to the eastern Australia, dominates the plantation industry in Western Australia. Plantations are often adjacent to remnant native eucalypt forest and each vegetation type (plantation or forest) could harbour pathogens to which the other has not been exposed. A survey of Botryosphaeria spp. associated with E. globulus and native Eucalyptus spp. in Western Australia resulted in four distinct culture morphologies among 147 isolates. Representative isolates of each type were characterised based upon morphological features and comparisons of a combined DNA dataset including the internal transcribed spacer, a part of the ∞Ò-tubulin gene and part of the elongation factor 1-∞Ñ. The majority of the isolates (95%) were B. australis. Of the remaining isolates, one was B. parva, three were Dichomera eucalypti (an anamorph of an unknown Botryosphaeria sp.) and the remaining four isolates were identified as representative of a new species described here as Fusicoccum macroclavatum sp. nov. The new species resided alone in a well-supported clade and differed morphologically from other Fusicoccum spp. by having large, predominantly elongate¡Vclavate conidia. Fusicoccum macroclavatum sp. nov. was the most pathogenic of the four species, and its rare occurrence only on eucalypt species endemic to eastern Australia suggests this species has been introduced to Western Australia.
S1271	G. J. van Coller;S. Denman;J. Z. Groenewald;S. C. Lamprecht;P. W. Crous	2005	Characterisation and pathogenicity of Cylindrocladiella spp. associated with root and cutting rot symptoms of grapevines in nurseries	Australasian Plant Pathology							Species of Cylindrocladiella occur on a variety of hosts, where they are known to act as pathogens or saprobes. Eight species from this genus are currently recognised, of which five have been reported previously in South Africa, namely C. camelliae, C. elegans, C. lageniformis, C. parva, and C. peruviana. In a recent survey of soilborne diseases of nursery grapevines in the Western Cape province of South Africa, various isolates of Cylindrocladiella were obtained from a newly established 99-Richter mother block exhibiting decline symptoms. The DNA phylogeny of these and additional isolates, also obtained from declining grapevines, was determined by sequencing the ITS (ITS1, ITS2 and 5.8S) as well as ß-tubulin and histone H3 gene regions. Results from this study revealed that four species of Cylindrocladiella occur on grapevines in South Africa, namely C. lageniformis, C. parva, C. peruviana, as well as a new species described here as C. viticola, which forms part of the C. infestans species complex. Pathogenicity trials, using stem inoculations on green and one-year-old 99-Richter cuttings were conducted to determine the pathogenicity of selected isolates of these species, but these results were inconclusive.
S1864	V. Andjic;P. A. Barber;A. J. Carnegie;G. Pegg;G. E. S. J. Hardy;M. J. Wingfield;T. I. Burgess	2007	Kirramyces viscidus sp. nov., a new eucalypt pathogen from tropical Australia closely related to the serious leaf pathogen, Kirramyces destructans	Australasian Plant Pathology	36		478-487				Kirramyces destructans is a devastating pathogen that causes leaf, bud and shoot blight diseases of Eucalyptus in the sub-tropics and tropics. During routine surveillance of eucalypt taxa trials in Northern Queensland symptoms resembling K. destructans were observed on E. grandis and E. grandis x E. camaldulensis. Phylogenetic and morphological studies revealed a new pathogen K. viscida, which is closely related to K. destructans. While E. grandis from the Copperload provenance recovered from disease, hybrids from South America were highly susceptible to K. viscida, and are consequently not suitable for planting in northern Queensland. Preliminary results from the present study suggest this fungus probably originates from Australia. The fact that K. viscida is closely related to K. destructans suggests the possible impact of disease to Australian eucalypt plantations could be devastating.
S2036	C. A. Pérez;Z. W. de Beer;N. A. Altier;M. J. Wingfield;R. A. Blanchette	2008	Discovery of the eucalypt pathogen Quambalaria eucalypti infecting a non-Eucalyptus host in Uruguay	Australasian Plant Pathology							Quambalaria eucalypti -a serious pathogen of Eucalyptus- is believed to be native to Australia and it has been introduced into various southern hemisphere countries including Uruguay. In this study we record the discovery of Q. eucalypti causing leaf lesions on the native to Uruguay tree, Myrceugenia glaucescens. The identity of the pathogen was confirmed using DNA sequence comparisons of the ITS region. This is the first record of the pathogen on a host other than Eucalyptus. It clearly indicates a disturbing example of an alien invasive pathogen having undergone a host-shift from non-native Eucalyptus to a native tree in Uruguay.
S2240	M. K. Tan;A. Ghalayini;I. Sharma;J. Yi;R. Shivas;M. Priest;D. Wright	2008	A one tube fluorescent assay for the quarantine detection and identification of Tilletia indica and other grass bunts in wheat	Australasian Plant Pathology							A new molecular assay with enhanced specificity and sensitivity has been developed to help in surveillance for Karnal bunt, a quarantineable disease with a significant impact on international trade. The protocol involves the release of DNA from spores, PCR amplification to enrich Tilletia-specific templates from released DNA and a 5-plex real-time quantitative PCR (qPCR) assay to detect, identify and distinguish T. indica in wheat grains as well as some other Tilletia species (T. walkeri, T. ehrhartae, T. horrida and a group comprising T. caries, T. laevis, T. contraversa, T. bromi and T. fusca). This fluorescent molecular tool has a detection sensitivity of 1 spore and thus bypasses the germination step, which in the current protocol is required for confirmation when only a few spores have been found in grain samples. The assay contains five dual-labelled species-specific probes and associated species-specific primer pairs in a PCR mix in one tube. The different amplification products are quantitated and identified simultaneously by 5 different fluorescence spectra. This specific and sensitive assay with reduced labour and reagent requirements makes it an effective and economically sustainable tool to be used in a Karnal bunt surveillance program. This protocol will also be valuable for assessment of the level of some contaminant Tilletia in wheat grains.
S2x5x96c18c22c01	P. Y. Ladiges;C. J. Humphries;M. I. H. Brooker	1987	Cladistic and biogeographic analysis of western Australian species of Eucalyptus L'Herit., informal subgenus Monocalyptus Pryor & Johnson	Australian Journal of Botany	35		251-281				The Western Australian species of Eucalyptus informal subgenus Monocalyptus were shown to be a paraphyletic group. A cladistic analysis of a larger sample of taxa, using a Wagner parsimony method, showed that the Queensland species E. rubiginosa is the sister species to all others in Monocalyptus. The Western Australian species E. jacksonii and E. brevistylis were found to be connected to eastern taxa and are probably related to the lineages leading to the 'green ashes' and 'stringybarks' etc. The remaining Western Australian species formed a number of subclades, one of which, including E. marginata and E. staeri, had a separate connection with eastern species, probably all of the 'blue ashes'. A revised informal classification recognising three sections, five subsections, five infrasections, five superseries, five series and two subseries is presented. Biogeographic analyses of each of the major subclades are summarised as one area-consensus tree representing a classification of areas as determined from the taxonomy of the eucalypts. A comparison with the geological and climatological history points to the Tertiary as the likely time of first speciation within Monocalyptus.
S2264	S. M. Sede;D. Tosto;P. Talia;M. Luckow;L. Poggio;R. H. Fortunato	2009	Phylogenetic relationships among southern South American species of Camptosema, Galactia and Collaea (Diocleinae: Papilionoideae: Leguminosae) based on molecular and morphological data	Australian Journal of Botany							The neotropical genus Camptosema in its southern distribution is represented by four species: C. paraguariense, C. praeandinum, C. rubicundum and C. scarlatinum. Camptosema rubicundum, is the only species with all the diagnostic characters of the genus: i.e. tubular calyx. The other three taxa are related morphologically and cytologically to Galactia and Collaea, two closely allied genera in the subtribe Diocleinae. Individual and combined phylogenetic analyses of morphology, ITS and trnL-F were conducted in order to examine the position of these species as well as to explore its relationship with Galactia and Collaea species in southern South America. In none of the analyses do Camptosema species form a monophyletic group. Instead, they are scattered in different groups. These results together with cytological, morphological and AFLP data provides good support for re-evaluating the taxonomic position of these species within Camptosema.
S11x15x96c21c11c12	G. Hormiga;W. G. Eberhard;J. A. Coddington	1995	Web-construction behaviour in Australian Phonognatha and the phylogeny of nephiline and tetragnathid spiders (Araneae: Tetragnathidae)	Australian Journal of Zoology	43	4	313-364	10.1071/ZO9950313 			Details of web-construction behaviour and morphology support the monophyly of nephiline spiders with Phonognatha as the sister-group to the remaining nephiline genera examined in this study. Phylogenetic analysis of the behavioural data suggests that specialisations in nephiline building behaviour and web architecture did not evolve concurrently, and that some preceded the female giantism (not male dwarfism) for which nephiline spiders are well-known. Cladistic analysis of 60 characters supports the monophyly of both Tetragnathidae and Tetragnathinae. New data from spinneret silk gland spigots, combined with other morphological and behavioural characters, provide the first concrete evidence that 'metine' genera, occasionally regarded as either a distinct family or subfamily, are a paraphyletic assemblage.
S1638	D. Raterman;R. W. Meredith;L. A. Ruedas;M. S. Springer	2006	Phylogenetic relationships of the cuscuses and brushtail possums using the nuclear gene, BRCA1 (Marsupialia: Phalangeridae)	Australian Journal of Zoology							The family Phalangeridae is comprised of approximately two-dozen extinct and extant species that include the brushtail possums (Trichosurus), scaly-tailed possum (Wyulda) and cuscuses (Phalanger, Strigocuscus, Spilocuscus, and Ailurops). Morphological studies have suggested that Ailurops ursinus is the sister taxon to all other phalangerids. Another relationship of interest is Strigocuscus celebensis, whose morphologically based taxonomic affinity has habitually been with trichosurins. Mitochondrial 12S rRNA results, however, found moderate support for an Ailurops and Strigocuscus celebensis clade and placed A. ursinus and S. celebensis as sister to Phalanger and Spilocuscus. This study uses nuclear sequence data from the breast cancer and ovarian cancer susceptibility gene 1 (BRCA1) to test previous mitochondrial DNA results and uses relaxed molecular clock methods to estimate divergence dates. The results support Ailurops as sister taxa to S. celebensis and this clade as sister to Phalangerini. Relaxed molecular dating methods suggest a date of 21-29 million years for the split between Trichosurini and remaining phalangerids and 17-24 million years for the split between Ailurops + Strigocuscus celebensis and Phalangerini. Several vicariant/dispersal events are necessary to explain the geographic distribution of Phalangeridae and our estimated molecular divergence dates are congruent with previously proposed Southeast Asian geological events.
S1x28x96c14c14c15	A. A. Anderberg;P. Eldenas	1991	A cladistic analysis of Anigozanthos and Macropidia (Haemodoraceae)	Australian Systematic Botany	4		655-664				Using morphological data and a computerised parsimony program, the Australian genera Anigozanthos and Macropidia (Haemodoraceae) have been analysed cladistically in order to formulate a hypothesis of their phylogenetic relationship. The results are illustrated with two cladograms and indicate that Anigozanthos together with Macropidia form a monophyletic group diagnosed by a string of synapomorphies, with Macropidia fuliginosa being a derived relative of the species of Anigozanthos subgenus Anigozanthos. Consequently, Macropidia fuliginosa is here treated as a section Macropidia of Anigozanthos.
S11x4x95c21c23c41	M. D. Crisp	1991	Contributions towards a revision of Daviesia Smith (Fabaceae: Mirbelieae). II. The D. latifolia group	Australian Systematic Botany	4		229-298				The Daviesia latifolia group, consisting of 16 species from eastern and southern Australia with horizontally flattened, non-pungent phyllodes, more or less united upper calyx-lobes and confluent anther-cells, is revised. Multivariate analysis (ordination and classification) of morphometric data is used to resolve the D. mimosoides/buxifolia species complex. As a result, one new species, D. elliptica, is segregated from D. buxifolia, and a new montane subspecies (acris) is recognised within D. mimosoides. Relationships of all taxa in the D. latifolia group are studied using cladistic analysis. A cline linking D. leptophylla with D. mimosoidaes through a hybrid zone is described from the Tinderry Mountains near Canberra. Daviesia elliptica, D. laevis, D. mimosoides subsp. acris, D. newbeyi, D. pauciflora and D. suaveolens are described as new, and D. mimosoides var. laxiflora is raised to species rank. Twelve natural hybrids are briefly described.
S729	D. G. Kelch	2002	Phylogenetic assessment of the monotypic genera Sundacarpus Page and Manoao (Coniferales: Podocarpaceae) utilising evidence from 18S rDNA sequences	Australian Systematic Botany	15	1	29-35	10.1071/SB01002			The Podocarpaceae are the most morphologically diverse of conifer families. A taxonomic trend has resulted in recognising this diversity via smaller generic groupings, including several monotypes. A phylogenetic assessment of the monotypic genera Sundacarpus and Manoao was conducted employing maximum parsimony analysis of sequence data from 18S-ribosomal DNA from 34 gymnosperm taxa, including 29 Podocarpaceae. In resulting trees, there is high bootstrap support for Podocarpaceae, including Phyllocladus, but the order of deep branches within the family is equivocal. Prumnopitys (Sundacarpus) amara (Blume) de Laub. and four other Prumnopitys spp. comprise a clade with a bootstrap value of 100%, supporting the retention of Sundacarpus as a section of Prumnopitys. Lagarostrobos franklinii (Hook.f.) Quinn and L. (Manoao) colensoi (Hook.) Quinn comprise a clade with equivocal bootstrap support, echoing previous results from parsimony analysis of morphological data. A conservative approach (i.e. one avoiding unnecessary monotypes) favours the retention of L. colensoi in Lagarostrobos, pending further evidence of relationships within the group.
S640	D. A. Steane;D. Nicolle;G. E. McKinnon;R. E. Vaillancourt;B. M. Potts	2002	Higher-level relationships among the eucalypts are resolved by ITS-sequence data	Australian Systematic Botany	15	1	49–62	10.1071/SB00039			This expanded survey of ITS sequences represents the largest analysis of molecular data ever attempted on Eucalyptus. Sequences of the internal transcribed spacer (ITS) region of the nuclear ribosomal DNA were included in an analysis of 90 species of Eucalyptus s.s. and 28 species representing eight other genera (Allosyncarpia, Angophora, Arillastrum, Corymbia, Eucalyptopsis, Stockwellia, Lophostemon and Metrosideros). The results of the study indicate that Angophora and Corymbia form a well-supported clade that is highly differentiated from Eucalyptus s.s. Corymbia species are divided between two clades, one of which may be the sister to Angophora. Allosyncarpia, Arillastrum, Eucalyptopsis and ‘Stockwellia’ are also highly differentiated from Eucalyptus s.s. If the genus Eucalyptus is to be expanded to include Angophora and Corymbia(sensu Brooker 2000), ITS data suggest that Allosyncarpia, Eucalyptopsis, ‘Stockwellia’ and potentially Arillastrum should also be included in Eucalyptus s.l. The ITS data suggest that subg. Symphyomyrtus is paraphyletic and that subg. Minutifructus should be included within it. Within subg.Symphyomyrtus, only sect. Maidenaria appears to be monophyletic. Sections Adnataria and Dumaria are probably monophyletic; sections Exsertaria and Latoangulatae are very close and probably should be combined in a single section. Section Bisectae is polyphyletic and is divided into two distinct lineages. The phylogenetic groups depicted by ITS data are consistent with the frequency of natural inter-specific hybridisations as well as data from controlled crosses within subgenus Symphyomyrtus. The ITS data illustrate that subg. Idiogenes and western Australian monocalypts are early evolutionary lines relative to E. diversifolia, E. rubiginosa (monotypic subg. Primitiva) and the eastern monocalypts and that subg. Primitiva should be sunk into subg. Eucalyptus. Subgenus Eudesmia may be monophyletic, grouping with subgenera Idiogenes and Eucalyptus. Further work is required to confirm the phylogenetic positions of the monotypic subgenera Alveolata, Cruciformes, Acerosae and Cuboidea.
S1993	J. M. Burke;M. J. Bayly;P. B. Adams;P. Y. Ladiges	2008	Molecular phylogenetic analysis of Dendrobium (Orchidaceae) with emphasis on the Australian section Dendrocoryne and implications for generic classification	Australian Systematic Botany	21						Sequences of the internal transcribed spacers (ITS) of nuclear ribosomal DNA were obtained for a broad range of dendrobium orchids for phylogenetic analysis using parsimony. A progressive approach was used to identify functional outgroups for analysis of all taxa in Dendrobium sect. Dendrocoryne. Our first, broadest analysis confirmed the results of other workers: that Dendrobium sensu lato includes a major Australasian clade and a sister Asian clade. In the Australasian clade, the New Zealand species D. cunninghamii (= gen. Winika, Clements et al. 1997) was identified as the sister group to a well-supported clade that includes the genera Cadetia, Diplocaulobium and Flickingeria, and Dendrobium sects. Grastidium, Latouria, Spatulata, Australorchis (= gen. Australorchis), Rhizobium (= gen. Dockrillia) and Dendrocoryne. Sect. Dendrocoryne is probably polyphyletic, with two species, D. aemulum and D. callitrophilum (= gen. Tropilis), outside the main group and sect. Rhizobium (= gen. Dockrillia) nested within it. Sect. Australorchis (= gen. Australorchis) is possibly the sister group to the clade of Rhizobium plus the main group of Dendrocoryne. Thelychiton (a genus reinstated for a number of species in Dendrocoryne) is polyphyletic given that Tetrabaculum (= D. tetragonum complex) and Dockrillia fall within the same clade. The splitting of the Australasian dendrobiums into various genera by other authors is excessive and unnecessary, and alternative taxonomic treatments are offered here for debate. Our study included accessions for all varieties in three widespread eastern Australian species: D. speciosum, D. kingianum and D. tetragonum. Each of these species showed significant sequence divergence between particular geographic regions, but some varieties had identical sequences. The splitting of D. speciosum into eleven species is not supported. We identified pseudogenes in the ITS region for D. fleckeri and D. finniganense, which appear to have evolved before these two species diverged, but support their sister relationship. Sequences for D. callitrophilum and D. (Grastidium) baileyi (the latter from GenBank) also appear to be pseudogenes, and these taxa need further study.
S2480	C. Parra- O.;M. Bayly;A. Drinnan;F. Udovicic;P. Ladiges	2009	Phylogeny, major clades and infrageneric classification of Corymbia (Myrtaceae), based on nuclear ribosomal DNA and morphology	Australian Systematic Botany	22	5	384-399	10.1071/sb09028			Phylogenetic relationships of sections and species within Corymbia (Myrtaceae), the bloodwood eucalypts, were evaluated using combined analyses of nuclear ribosomal DNA (ETS and ITS) and morphological characters. Combining morphological characters with molecular data provided resolution of relationships within Corymbia. The analyses support the monophyly of the genus and recognition of two major clades, treated here as subgenera nov.: subgenus Corymbia including informal sections recognised by Hill and Johnson, Rufaria (red bloodwoods), Apteria and Fundoria; and subgenus Blakella including sections Politaria (spotted gums), Cadagaria, Blakearia (paper-fruited bloodwoods or ghost gums) and Ochraria (yellow bloodwoods). Hill and Johnson s section Rufaria is monophyletic if Apteria and Fundoria are included. It is evident that among the red bloodwoods series are not monophyletic and a number of morphological characters result from convergent evolution. There is strong morphological and molecular evidence that the three species of red bloodwoods that occur in south west Western Australia (series Gummiferae C. calophylla and C. haematoxylon, and series Ficifolia C. ficifolia) form a monophyletic group, separate from the eastern C. gummifera (series Gummiferae), which is probably sister to the clade of all other red bloodwoods. Phylogenetic results support recognition of taxonomic categories within Corymbia, which are formalised here.
S2525	M. A. Chemisquy;O. Morrone	2010	Phylogenetic analysis of the subtribe Chloraeinae (Orchidaceae): a preliminary approach based on three chloroplast markers	Australian Systematic Botany	23		38-46	10.1071/SB09026			The systematic position and relationships between some South American terrestrial orchids, such as Bipinnula, Chloraea, Gavilea and Geoblasta, is unclear. These four genera have been grouped in the subtribe Chloraeinae by several authors. Previous phylogenetic studies of the group have only included a few species of Chloraea and Gavilea and not of Bipinnula or Geoblasta. Relationships among these four genera were explored and the monophyly of the subtribe Chloraeinae and the genera Chloraea and Gavilea were tested in this contribution. Molecular phylogenetic analyses were conducted, using three chloroplast markers: the matK-trnK intron, the atpB-rbcL spacer and the rpoC1 gene. Sequences were analyzed under Maximum Parsimony and Bayesian inference. In all the analyses Bipinnula, Chloraea, Gavilea and Geoblasta were grouped in a clade with high support, where Bipinnula, Geoblasta and Gavilea were nested inside Chloraea. Consequently, Chloraea was paraphyletic, while Gavilea turned out to be monophyletic with high values of support. The Cranichideae species appeared as a sister group of the Chloraeinae. A more exhaustive taxonomic sampling is needed to resolve the systematic placement of the subtribe Chloraeinae and the internal relationships between the genera and species that form it.
S406	S. LaGreca;H. T. Lumbsch	2001	The phylogenetic position of the Candelariaceae (Lecanorales) inferred from anatomical and molecular data	Bibliotheca Lichenologica	78		211-222				The systematic position of the family Candelariaceae is re-evaluated using anatomical and molecular data. The anatomy of the ascomata and their ontogeny was studied and was found to be uniform within the family and fitting well into the scheme observed in the genus Lecanora. rDNA ITS genes were sequenced from two species of the Candelariaceae and analysed by maximum parsimony together with 11 Lecanora sequences, one Protoparmelia sequence, and two sequences from the Parmeliaceae. A strict consensus of seven most-parsimonious trees shows that the two species of Candelariaceae form a monophyletic group nested within the Lecanoraceae. Based on anatomical and molecular evidence, the Candelariaceae is proposed to belong within the Lecanoraceae, and should not be regarded as a separate family.
S1268	A. B. Burnette;T. H. Struck;K. Halanych	2005	Holopelagic Poeobius meseres ('Poeobiidae', Annelida) is derived from benthic Flabelligerid worms	Biological Bulletin	208		213-220				Phylogenetic relationships among and within the >70 recognized families of Annelida are poorly understood. In some cases, such as the monotypic Poeobiidae, derived morphology hinders the ability to find convincing synapomorphies that help elucidate evolutionary origins. In such cases, molecular data can be useful. Poeobiidae consists of the holopelagic polychaete Poeobius meseres which is typically found in mid-water depths off of California. Morphologists have speculated that it is close to or within Flabelligeridae, but definitive evidence was lacking. Herein we use maximum likelihood phylogenetic reconstruction methods to examine the nuclear 18S rDNA (SSU) gene and the mitochondrial cytochrome b gene. Our results strongly support the hypothesis that P. meseres is a highly derived flabelligerid annelid closely related to Therochaeta. Thus, Poeobiidae is a junior synonym for Flabelligeridae. This result raises interesting questions about the evolution of the holopelagic P. meseres from a benthic ancestral flabelligerid.
S1291	A. G. Collins;M. Daly	2005	A new deepwater species of Stauromedusae, Lucernaria janetae (Cnidaria, Staurozoa, Lucernariidae), and a preliminary investigation of stauromedusan phylogeny based on nuclear and mitochondrial rDNA data	Biological Bulletin							The deepwater stauromedusan Lucernaria janetae n. sp is described from adult and juvenile specimens collected from the East Pacific Rise. Lucernaria janetae is the first species in the genus recorded from the Pacific Ocean, and differs from its congeners in size and morphology. Mitochondrial (16S) and nuclear (SSU) ribosomal gene sequences from L. janetae were analyzed with those of representative stauromedusan taxa to evaluate stauromedusan monophyly. Both genes recovered a strongly monophyletic Stauromedusae that is the sister group to all other medusozoans. Support of these hypotheses is robust to method of phylogenetic reconstruction and to outgroup selection, buttressing the argument that Stauromedusae should be recognized as the class Staurozoa. The molecular markers used here favor the same topology of relationships among our samples and clearly distinguished between two species, Haliclystus sanjuanensis and H. octoradiatus, which have been considered synonymous by many workers. A stable systematic framework for Stauromedusae appears achievable through comprehensive study of both morphological and sequence data.
S1437	A. Schulze	2006	Phylogeny and genetic diversity of palolo worms (Palola, Eunicidae) from the tropical North Pacific and the Caribbean	Biological Bulletin							Palolo worms (Palola, Eunicidae) are best known for annual mass spawnings or „risings‰ in the South Pacific. Palola currently contains fourteen morphologically similar species, mostly from shallow, tropical waters. In this study, 60 specimens of Palola from nine locations in the tropical North Pacific and the Caribbean were sequenced for the two mitochondrial markers cytochrome c oxidase subunit I and 16S ribosomal RNA to infer phylogenetic relationships, genetic diversity and phylogeography within the taxon. Phylogenetic analysis was performed using Bayesian statistics and parsimony. Vouchers of the same specimens were examined morphologically. Two major clades (A and B) can be distinguished within the monophyletic Palola. A number of individuals in clade B bear rows of ventral eyespots in the posterior body region, typical for swarming P. viridis and probably a synapomorphy for clade B. No morphological synapomorphy was found for clade A. Haplotypes from divergent clades often co-occur in the same location. Some haplotypes are geographically widespread, in one case covering the entire east-west expansion of the tropical Pacific. These results imply that despite the apparent absence of teleplanic larvae in eunicid polychaetes, long-distance dispersal is possible in at least some lineages of Palola.
S2007	D. J. Thornhill;A. A. Wiley;A. L. Campbell;F. F. Bartol;A. Teske;K. M. Halanych	2008	Endosymbionts of Siboglinum fiordicum and the Phylogeny of Bacterial Endosymbionts in Siboglinidae (Annelida)	Biological Bulletin							Siboglinid worms are a group of gutless marine annelids that are nutritionally dependent upon endosymbiotic bacteria. Four major groups of siboglinids are known˜vestimentiferans, moniliferans, Osedax spp., and frenulates. Although endosymbionts of vestimentiferans and Osedax spp. have been previously characterized, little is currently known about endosymbiotic bacteria associated with frenulate and moniliferan siboglinids. This is particularly surprising given that frenulates are the most speciated and widely distributed group of siboglinids. Here, we molecularly characterize endosymbiotic bacteria associated with the frenulate siboglinid Siboglinum fiordicum by using 16S rDNA ribotyping in concert with lasercapture microdissection (LCM). Phylogenetic analysis indicates that at least three major clades of endosymbiotic ??-proteobacteria associate with siboglinid annelids, with each clade corresponding to a major siboglinid group. S. fiordicum endosymbionts are a group of ??ˆproteobacteria that are divergent from bacteria associated with vestimentiferan or Osedax hosts. Interestingly, symbionts of S. fiordicum, from Norway, are most closely related to symbionts of the frenulate Oligobrachia mashikoi from Japan, suggesting that symbionts of frenulates may share common evolutionary history or metabolic features.
S11x7x95c11c10c03	L. An-Ming	1990	A preliminary cladistic study of the families of the superorder Lamiiflorae	Biological Journal of the Linnean Society	103		39-57				A preliminary cladistic analysis was undertaken to evaluate the relationships between families of the superorder Lamiiflorae sensu Dahlgren. Several character complexes were surveyed, and ultimately 29 informative characters were used for the study. Three families, Clethraceae, Oleaceae and Solanaceae were selected for outgroup comparison and polarization of the characters. A data matrix was constructed for the 23 ingroup families. The data matrix was analysed with the cladistic parsimony program Hennig86. Three equally parsimonious cladograms were found. Many family interrelationships could not be resolved, although several groups were common to all three cladograms, as shown by a strict consensus tree. The Retziaceae emerged as the sister group to the remaining families. About half of those appeared in a large polytomy in the consensus tree. There was also one possibly monophyletic complex of families involving the Lamiales with the families Verbenaceae, Lamiaceae, Phrymaceae and Callitrichaceae as well as the three isolated families Trapellaceae, Hippuridaceae, and Hydrostachyaceae. Within this complex, Verbenaceae and Lamiaceae came out as sister groups, as did Callitrichaceae and Hydrostachyaceae, with Hippuridaceae as sister group to them. However, the results must be regarded as tentative.
S2x2x96c16c43c04	S. Knapp	1991	A cladistic analysis of the Solanum sessile species group (Section Geminata pro parte: Solanaceae)	Biological Journal of the Linnean Society	106		73-89				The Solanum sessile species group is one of eight putatively monophyletic subgroups of the large and diverse Solanum section Geminata. The species group comprises ten species of mostly northern South American trees and shrubs. Characters and character states peculiar to Solanum are discussed in detail. A cladistic analysis of the sessile group yielded four equally parsimonious trees which represent two basic tree topologies. The consensus cladogram is composed of three main clades. Biogeographic analysis using the consensus tree revealed no components in common to the three clades. Possible geographical scenarios are discussed with reference to the geological history of northern South America.
S361	G. W. Rouse	1999	Trochophore concepts: ciliary bands and the evolution of larvae in spiralian Metazoa	Biological Journal of the Linnean Society	66	4	411-464	10.1111/j.1095-8312.1999.tb01920.x		prototroch, metatroch, larval feeding, Polychaeta, Spiralia, Trochozoa, opposed-bands	Trochophore is used in a strict sense for larvae having an opposed-band method of feeding, involving a prototroch and metatroch. Other ciliary bands such as a telotroch and neurotroch may be present. The trochophore has been proposed to represent the ancestral larval form for a group of metazoan phyla (including all members of the Spiralia). Trochophore is a name also often applied to larvae that do not conform to the above definition. A cladistic analysis of spiralian taxa (with special reference to polychaete annelids), based on a suite of adult and larval characters, is used to assess several hypotheses: (1) That the trochophore (in a strict sense) is a plesiomorphic form for the Spiralia; (2) That the strictly defined trochophore is plesiomorphic for members of the Spiralia such as the Polychaeta. The homology of each of the various separate ciliary bands of spiralian larvae, and features such as the apical tuft and protonephridia is also assessed. The results favour the conclusion that the trochophore, if defined as a feeding larval form using opposed bands, should not be regarded as an ancestral (= plesiomorphic) type for the Spiralia, or any other large taxon such as the Polychaeta or Mollusca. The evidence suggests that the various ciliary bands have differing evolutionary histories, and only the Echiura (possibly an annelid group) has members with the classical trochophore. The trochophore is re-defined as a larval form minimally with a prototroch. This broad definition covers a wide variety of larvae, and matches the current usage more accurately than the restricted term. Features such as the neurotroch, telotroch and opposed-band feeding show convergence and reversals. The nature of the metatroch requires further investigation. The presence of a prototroch (and hence trochophore larvae) is used to identify an apomorphy-based taxon, Trochozoa, that includes the first ancestor to have evolved a prototroch and all its descendants. This minimally includes the Annelida (sensu lato), Echiura, Entoprocta, Mollusca and Sipuncula and is a less inclusive taxon than the Spiralia.
S513	O. R. P. Bininda-Emonds;D. M. Decker-Flum;J. L. Gittleman	2001	The utility of chemical signals as phylogenetic characters: an example from the Felidae	Biological Journal of the Linnean Society	72	1	1-15	10.1111/j.1095-8312.2001.tb01297.x		phylogeny; systematics; Felidae; chemical signals; lipids; evolution	Chemical secretions that are explicitly tied to species recognition may potentially be informative for phylogenetic reconstruction, especially when traditional morphological or molecular characters lack resolution. Anal sac secretions from 16 species within the family Felidae (order Carnivora) were chemically analyzed and their utility as phylogenetic characters was assessed. Results were generally consistent across the different chemical data types (e.g. glycolipids, neutral lipids, or phospholipids). Two major clades were indicated, falling out according to body size: one for species greater than 30 kg (Panthera, Uncia, and Puma) and another for those less than 12 kg (remaining species). The primary solutions agreed with respect to the species pairs Prionailurus + Leptailurus, Caracal+Lynx, Oncifelis+Leopardus, Otocolobus+Felis, Panthera leo + P pardus, and P. tigris + Uncia. The only area of disagreement between chemical types was the positioning of the mountain lion (Puma concolor); however, this species appears to cluster with the cheetah (Acinonyx jubatus) in the Tjig cat clade. Although our solutions differ from six previously proposed hypotheses of felid phylogeny (morphological and molecular), the previous estimates all differ strongly amongst themselves reflecting the historical uncertainty regarding felid systematics. Phylogenies derived from the lipid data were very robust and decisive. Few equally most parsimonious trees were obtained, consistency indices were much higher than their expected values, and bootstrap and Bremer support values were also high. Thus, our findings illustrate the species-specific nature of chemical signals and their usefulness as phylogenetic characters.
S716	P. G. Ihlen;S. Ekman	2002	Outline of phylogeny and character evolution in Rhizocarpon (Rhizocarpaceae, lichenized Ascomycota) based on nuclear ITS and mitochondrial SSU ribosomal DNA sequences	Biological Journal of the Linnean Society	77	4	535-546	10.1046/j.1095-8312.2002.00127.x		Catolechia; lichen; MCMC; parsimony; Poeltinula	The phylogeny of the lichen genus Rhizocarpon (Rhizocarpaceae, lichenized Ascomycota) was investigated using nucleotide sequences from the ITS region of the nuclear ribosomal DNA and the SSU region of the mitochondrial ribosomal DNA from 13 species of Rhizocarpon, Catolechia wahlenbergii and Poeltinula cerebrina. Phylogenetic estimations were performed using maximum parsimony and Bayesian MCMC tree sampling. Twelve phylogenetic null hypotheses were tested using MCMC tree sampling. The evolution of five morphological characters was assessed by mapping them onto MCMC tree samples. The results indicate that Rhizocarpon in its current sense is polyphyletic and can only be made monophyletic if R. hochstetteri is excluded or Poeltinula, and possibly also Catolechia, are included. The root placement in the Rhizocarpaceae is ambiguous, either Catolechia or Poeltinula + R. hochstetteri being the sistergroup to the rest of the family. Previously suggested infrageneric arrangements based on presence or absence of the yellow substance rhizocarpic acid in the thallus or the septation of the ascospores are unnatural. Some species with grey or brown thallus may have evolved from a yellow ancestor. Spore septation and colour, amyloidity of the thalline medulla, and the presence of stictic acid complex and rhizocarpic acid are shown to have changed multiple times during the course of evolution.
S986	S. J. Steppan;C. Zawadzki;L. R. Heaney	2003	Molecular phylogeny of the endemic Philippine rodent Apomys (Muridae) and the dynamics of diversification in an oceanic archipelago	Biological Journal of the Linnean Society							We analyzed the phylogenetic relationships of 10 of the 13 known species of the genus Apomys using DNA sequences from cytochrome b. Apomys, endemic to oceanic portions of the Philippine archipelago, diversified during the Pliocene as these oceanic islands arose de novo. Several of the speciation events probably took place on Luzon or Mindanao, the two largest, oldest, and most topographically complex islands. Only one speciation event is associated with vicariance due to Pleistocene sea-level fluctuation, and a Pleistocene diversification model in which isolation is driven by sea-level changes is inconsistent with the data. Tectonic vicariance is nearly absent from the Philippines, in which tectonic coalescence plays a significant role. Most speciation events (about two-thirds) are associated with dispersal to newly developed oceanic islands. The data imply that the species have persisted for long periods, measured in millions of years after their origins; further implications therefore are that faunal turnover is very slow; and persistence over geological time spans is more prominent than repeated colonization and extinction. Neither the equilibrium nor the vicariance model of biogeography adequately encompasses these results; a model incorporating colonization, extinction, and speciation is necessary and must incorporate long-term persistence to accommodate our observations.
S775	C. J. Stoner;O. R. P. Bininda-Emonds;T. M. Caro	2003	The adaptive significance of coloration in lagomorphs	Biological Journal of the Linnean Society	79	2	309-328	10.1046/j.1095-8312.2003.00190.x		comparative method; hares; pelage coloration; phylogeny; pikas	Lagomorph pelage coloration was matched to habitat type, geographical region, altitude and behaviour to explore the adaptive significance of coloration patterns in this little-studied order of mammals. Analyses were conducted with and without taking phylogeny into account. The former analyses were based on a weighted, phylogenetic supertree for all extant species of lagomorphs that we constructed using morphological and molecular data from 146 papers in the literature. Although our analyses represent an initial, somewhat crude investigation, several clear trends are evident. First, overall body coloration across lagomorphs tends to match the background as shown for pale and red coloration and perhaps seasonal pelage change. The case for countershading being a method of concealment is far less strong. Second, ear tips appear to have a communicative role since they are conspicuous in many different habitats. Third, hypotheses for tail tips having a communicative role, for extremities being dark for physiological reasons, and for Gloger's rule received only partial support.
S1042	M. Schilthuizen;E. Gutteling;C. H. M. van Moorsel;F. W. Welter-Schultes;M. Haase;E. Gittenberger	2004	Phylogeography of the land snail Albinaria hippolyti (Pulmonata: Clausiliidae) from Crete, inferred from ITS-1 sequences	Biological Journal of the Linnean Society							The polytypic Cretan land snail Albinaria hippolyti has a range that is partly fragmented and partly subdivided by hybrid zones. For this reason, it has served as a model species for investigating speciation and radiation in Mediterranean Clausiliidae. The first internal transcribed spacer (ITS-1) of the nuclear ribosomal DNA was sequenced in twenty populations of A. hippolyti. The resulting phylogeography can be interpreted in the light of geological data and suggests that the species has undergone an initial, allopatric differentiation into three subspecies during the Pliocene or the late Miocene, followed by a later range expansion, the formation of hybrid zones, and a range reduction in the Pleistocene. At least one more subspecies may have evolved during the latter period. The taxon arthuriana might have been inappropriately classified as an A. hippolyti subspecies.
S1221	V. Wissemann;C. M. Ritz	2004	The genus Rosa (Rosoideae, Rosaceae) revisited: molecular analysis of nrITS-1 and atpB-rbcL intergenic spacer (IGS) versus conventional taxonomy	Biological Journal of the Linnean Society							Sequences of the nrDNA internal transcribed spacer 1 (nrITS-1) and atpB-rbcL intergenic spacer (IGS) of the cpDNA were analysed for all sections of the genus Rosa L. (Rosoideae, Rosaceae) to study molecular infrageneric taxonomy and relationships of Rosa with respect to conventional taxonomy based upon morphological and anatomical data as well as phytochemical characters. The results suggest that Rosa in its traditional infrageneric circumscription is not reflected by molecular data. Cinnamomeae, Carolinae and Pimpinellifoliae are not monophyletic based on the molecular data and this is mirrored in conventional taxonomy that separates these sections by weak morphological characters such as sepal performance, existence of bracts and number of flowers per inflorescence. Sect. Pimpinellifoliae is split by the monotypic sections Laevigatae, Platyrhodon, Bracteatae and Hesperhodos. Section Caninae is a natural allopolyploid group characterized by its autapomorphic ITS Canina-type and Canina-meiosis, cpDNA subdivides sect. Caninae into two natural clusters of eglandular and glandular glandular species. NrITS shows sect. Synstylae/Indicae to be the direct sister group to sect. Caninae, not Rosa (Gallicanae) although both groups are morphologically characterized by pinnate sepals. From our molecular data sect. Indicae and sect. Synstylae are consectional. The highest taxonomic rank below the generic level should be the sectional status.
S1463	I. Agnarsson	2006	Asymmetric female genitalia and other remarkable morphology in a new genus of cobweb spiders (Theridiidae, Araneae) from Madagascar	Biological Journal of the Linnean Society	87		211-232	10.1111/j.1095-8312.2006.00569.x			Symmetry is such a conspicuous feature of life that asymmetries draw our immediate attention. While not uncommon in bilateral organisms in general, asymmetry in spiders is rare. Here I report the first case of antisymmetry in external female genitalia in spiders, in the new genus Asygyna (Theridiidae: Araneae) from Madagascar. In the nearly 39 000 species of spiders described to date, the external structure of the female genitalia is symmetric. In entelegyne spiders paired external copulatory openings each lead to an internal copulatory duct, whose roughly symmetrical trajectories terminate in paired receptacles, the spermathecae. In Asygyna , here exemplified by two new species, A. huberi and A. coddingtoni , laterality is evident in the internal and external female genitalia. A single copulatory opening leads (either to the left or right depending on the individual) to a single copulatory duct with a distinctly asymmetric trajectory. The duct splits terminally shortly before entering the two spermathecae. The males are symmetric, but possibly only one palp can be used in copulation with each female. If adaptive, the selective forces behind this asymmetry are perplexing, as male access to females seems reduced. However, if males are plentiful, asymmetry may benefit the female by reducing insertion times and thus shortening copulation time, and by tightening her control over which males sire her offspring. Asygyna has a range of other bizarre sex-related morphologies, including prosomal pits and a well developed stridulatory mechanism in both sexes, a male proboscis, and simplified palps. A phylogenetic analysis, including 63 taxa and 242 morphological characters, places Asygyna in Pholcommatinae, sister to the enigmatic genus Carniella .
S1815	J. Lindell;F. R. Méndez-de la Cruz;R. W. Murphy	2007	Deep biogeographical history and cytonuclear discordance in the black-tailed brush lizard (Urosaurus nigricaudus) of Baja California	Biological Journal of the Linnean Society							Molecular tools help us deduce historical events such as vicariance, dispersal, gene flow, and speciation. However, our inferences are inevitably linked to the nature of the characters that we use to infer history. For example, the difference in inheritance patterns of commonly used mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) and nuclear DNA (non-recombining maternal versus recombining biparental inheritance) may lead us to propose different intraspecific histories. The peninsula of Baja California of northwestern Mexico, a region affected by a complex geological history involving temporary seaways, affords an opportunity to evaluate differences between these character types. We sequenced 1,966 bp of mtDNA to reconstruct the genealogical history of Urosaurus nigricaudus (black-tailed brush lizard) based on samples spanning the entire peninsula. The genealogy revealed several deep divergences, congruent with temporary vicariance events in the mid-peninsular, Loreto, and Cape regions, as well as a major split across the Isthmus of La Paz possibly resulting from a late Miocene seaway. The results support an emerging picture of the historical biogeography of Baja California, which suggests that key vicariance events are older than commonly perceived. The maternal genealogy of U. nigricaudus sharply contrasts with variation in allozymes that suggests very little differentiation across mitochondrial breaks, consistent with a pattern of ongoing gene flow. We interpret this cytonuclear discordance in relation to the historical biogeography of the region.
S2002	V. S. Smith;J. E. Light;L. A. Durden	2008	Rodent louse diversity, phylogeny, and cospeciation in the Manu Biosphere Reserve, Peru	Biological Journal of the Linnean Society							We investigate the diversity, cophylogenetic relationships, and biogeography of hoplopleurid sucking lice (Phthiraptera: Anoplura) parasitizing rodents (Muridae: Sigmodontinae) in the Manu National Park and Biosphere Reserve. Our morphological and molecular studies reveal that 15 distinct louse species parasitize 19 rodent species. Three of these louse species are new to science, and all but two of the host associations were previously unknown. We find that hoplopleurid lice parasitize multiple host species across a large geographic area (South America), and that Peru represents a new geographic locality for almost all the louse species collected in this study. Phylogenetic analyses of mitochondrial and nuclear data reveal that the louse family Hoplopleuridae and the genera Hoplopleura and Pterophthirus are not monophyletic, and lice do not appear to group by host tribe, collecting locality, or collection elevation. The lack of monophyly for these seemingly natural groups (taxonomic, locality, and elevation) indicates that host switching, with or without, parasite speciation is prevalent among hoplopleurid lice.
S355	O. R. P. Bininda-Emonds;J. L. Gittleman;A. Purvis	1999	Building large trees by combining phylogenetic information: a complete phylogeny of the extant Carnivora (Mammalia)	Biological Reviews	74	2	143-175	10.1111/j.1469-185X.1999.tb00184.x	http://www3.interscience.wiley.com/journal/119099920/abstract	Carnivora; character congruence; taxonomic congruence; supertree; matrix representation; parsimony; divergence times; fossil dates; molecular clock; macroevolution	One way to build larger, more comprehensive phylogenies is to combine the vast amount of phylogenetic information already available. We review the two main strategies for accomplishing this (combining raw data versus combining trees), but employ a relatively new variant of the latter: supertree construction. The utility of one supertree technique, matrix representation using parsimony analysis (MRP), is demonstrated by deriving a complete phylogeny for all 271 extant species of the Carnivora from 177 literature sources. Beyond providing a consensus estimate of carnivore phylogeny, the tree also indicates taxa for which the relationships remain controversial (e.g., the red panda; within canids, felids, and hyaenids) or have not been studied in any great detail (e.g., herpestids, viverrids, and intrageneric relationships in the procyonids). Times of divergence throughout the tree were also estimated from 74 literature sources based on both fossil and molecular data. We use the phylogeny to show that some lineages within the Mustelinae and Canidae contain significantly more species than expected for their age, illustrating the tree's utility for studies of macroevolution. It will also provide a useful foundation for comparative and conservational studies involving the carnivores.
S688	K. E. Jones;A. Purvis;A. MacLarnon;O. R. P. Bininda-Emonds;N. B. Simmons	2002	A phylogenetic supertree of the bats (Mammalia: Chiroptera)	Biological Reviews	77	2	223-259	10.1017/S1464793101005899		bats; evolution; matrix representation; parsimony; phylogeny; supertree construction	We present the first estimate of the phylogenetic relationships among all 916 extant and nine recently extinct species of bats (Mammalia: Chiroptera), a group that accounts for almost one-quarter of extant mammalian diversity. This phylogeny was derived by combining 105 estimates of bat phylogenetic relationships published since 1970 using the supertree construction technique of Matrix Representation with Parsimony (MRP). Despite the explosive growth in the number of phylogenetic studies of bats since 1990, phylogenetic relationships in the order have been studied non-randomly. For example, over one-third of all bat systematic studies to date have focused on relationships within Phyllostomidae, whereas relationships within clades such as Kerivoulinae and Murinae have never been studied using cladistic methods. Resolution in the supertree similarly differs among clades: overall resolution is poor (46.4% of a fully bifurcating solution) but reaches 100% in some groups (e.g. relationships within Mormoopidae). The supertree analysis does not support a recent proposal that Microchiroptera is paraphyletic with respect to Megachiroptera, as the majority of source topologies support microbat monophyly. Although it is not a substitute for comprehensive phylogenetic analyses of primary molecular and morphological data, the bat supertree provides a useful tool for future phylogenetic comparative and macroevolutionary studies. Additionally, it identifies clades that have been little studied, highlights groups within which relationships are controversial, and like all phylogenetic studies, provides preliminary hypotheses that can form starting points for future phylogenetic studies of bats.
S1188	S. A. Price;O. R. P. Bininda-Emonds;J. L. Gittleman	2004	A complete phylogeny of the whales, dolphins and even-toed hoofed mammals (Cetartiodactyla)	Biological Reviews							Despite the biological and economic importance of the Cetartiodactyla, the phylogeny of this clade remains controversial. Using the supertree approach of Matrix Representation with Parsimony, we present the first phylogeny to include all 290 extant species of the Cetacea (whales and dolphins) and Artiodactyla (even-toed hoofed mammals). At the family-level, the supertree is fully resolved. For example, the relationships among the Ruminantia appear as (((Cervidae, Moschidae) Bovidae) (Giraffidae, Antilocapridae) Tragulidae). However, due to either lack of phylogenetic study or contradictory information, polytomies occur within the clades Sus, Muntiacus, Cervus, Delphinidae, Ziphiidae and Bovidae. Complete species-level phylogenies are necessary for both illustrating and analysing biological, geographical and ecological patterns in an evolutionary framework. The present species-level tree of the Cetartiodactyla provides the first opportunity to examine comparative hypotheses across entirely aquatic and terrestrial species within a single mammalian order.
S1223	M. Hernández Fernández;E. S. Vrba	2005	A complete estimate of the phylogenetic relationships in Ruminantia: a dated species-level supertree of the extant ruminants	Biological Reviews							This paper presents the first complete estimate of the phylogenetic relationships among all 197 species of extant and recently extinct ruminants combining morphological, ethological and molecular information. The composite tree is derived by applying matrix representation using parsimony analysis to 164 previous partial estimates, and is remarkably well resolved, containing 159 nodes (> 80 % of the potential nodes in the completely resolved phylogeny). Bremer decay index has been used to indicate the degree of certainty associated with each clade. The ages of over 80 % of the clades in the tree have been estimated from information in the literature. The supertree for Ruminantia illustrates which areas of ruminant phylogeny are still only roughly known because of taxa with controversial relationships (e.g. Odocoileini, Antilopinae) or not studied in great detail (e.g. Muntiacus). It supports the monophyly of the ruminant families and Pecora. According to this analysis Antilocapridae and Giraffidae constitute the superfamily Giraffoidea, which is the sister group of a clade clustering Bovoidea and Cervoidea. The position of several taxa whose systematic positions have remained controversial in the past (Saiga, Pelea, Aepycerus, Pantholops, Ammotragus, Pseudois) is unambiguously established. Nevertheless, the position of Neotragus and Oreotragus within the original radiation of the non-bovine bovids remains unresolved in the present analysis. It also shows that six successive rapid cladogenesis events occurred within the infraorder Pecora during the Oligocene to middle Pliocene, which coincided with periods of global climatic change. Finally, the presented supertree will be a useful framework for comparative and evolutionary biologists interested in studies involving the ruminants.
S2406	P. Gaubert;G. Denys;T. Oberdorff	2009	Genus-level supertree of Cyprinidae (Actinopterygii: Cypriniformes), partitioned qualitative clade support and test of macro-evolutionary scenarios	Biological Reviews of the Cambridge Philosophical Society	84	4	653-689	10.1111/j.1469-185X.2009.00091.x			We used the supertree approach of matrix representation with parsimony to reconstruct to date the most exhaustive (genus-level) phylogeny of Cyprinidae. The supertree of Cyprinidae, representing 397 taxa (237 nominal genera) and 990 pseudocharacters, was well resolved (96 %) through extended consensus majority rule, although 36 nodes (9.4 %) were unsupported. The proportion of shared taxa among source trees was very low after calculation of the taxonomic coverage index (TCI = 0.059), which is proposed here as a more accurate alternative to the usual ratios pseudo-characters / source trees per taxon . We define a new index for the calculation of partitioned qualitative clade support, the partitioned rQS (prQS), which offers a straightforward visualization of the relative supports of source tree partitions at supertree nodes.The use of prQS showed that the molecular source tree partition contributed to most node supports within the supertree of Cyprinidae (73%, contra 21% for the morphological partition) and evidenced a fair proportion of conflict at nodes between the two partitions (21%), notably reflecting (i) the greater number and resolution of molecular source trees, and (ii) potential morphological convergences. Most of the higher-level relationships within Cyprinidae were supported by both morphological and molecular source tree partitions. Our supertree showed a well-supported dichotomy between a clade consisting of a barbine + rasborine lineage, sister group to (Barbinae [paraphyletic], (Cyprininae, Labeoninae)), and a clade consisting of other rasborines (large polytomy) and the two monophyletic groups ((Tincinae, Tanichthys), (Ecocarpia, (Acheilognathinae, (Gobioninae, Leuciscinae)))) and (Squaliobarbinae, (Xenocyprinae, Cultrinae)). Through the non-monophyly of almost all the traditional subfamilies of Cyprinidae and 34 genera, our supertree exemplified the taxonomic chaos that reigns in the classification of the family. It also highlighted that further efforts should aim at increasing taxonomic sampling and generating alternative phylogenetic signals, notably for the still poorly apprehended Tincinae, Squaliobarbinae, Acheilognathinae, Gobioninae, and Rasborinae, the latter representing a key taxon for the understanding of early cyprinid evolution. Our supertree also proved useful for testing macro-evolutionary scenarios at a wide taxonomic scale. Ancestral reconstructions using linear parsimony confirmed that the Oriental tropical region was the centre of origin of Cyprinidae, and identified three Oriental-to-Palaearctic, two Palaearctic-to-Nearctic, and one Oriental-to-Afrotropical major migration events. On the other hand, we almost completely rejected the hypothesis of presence of barbels as a plesiomorphic condition within Cyprinidae (although ambiguous for maxillary barbels of the Barbinae-Cyprininae type). The supertree of Cyprinidae serves as a basis to discuss the applications and bias of the newly proposed prQS, to provide future guidelines for a better achievement of cyprinid phylogeny, and to elaborate further on inter-continental migrations and the adaptive value of barbels.
S1384	A. G. Collins;B. Bentlage;G. I. Matsumoto;S. H. D. Haddock;K. Osborn;B. Schierwater	2005	Solution to the phylogenetic enigma of Tetraplatia, a worm-shaped cnidarian	Biology Letters							Tetraplatia is a genus containing two species of pelagic cnidarians of curious morphology. Their vermiform shape and four swimming flaps are difficult to relate to the features of other cnidarians, thus obscuring their phylogenetic affinities. Since their discovery in the mid-1800s, a number of prominent cnidarian workers have weighed in on this conundrum, some arguing that they are aberrant hydrozoans and others concluding that they are unusual scyphozoans. Current taxonomic practice conforms to the latter view. However, data presented here from the large and small subunits of the nuclear ribosome leave little doubt that Tetraplatia is in fact a hydrozoan genus. Indeed, its precise phylogenetic position is within Narcomedusae, as some authors had previously deduced based on structural characters. The distinctive body plan of Tetraplatia is remarkable because it appears to have a recent origin, in contrast to the prevailing pattern of metazoan history.
S1732	D. L. Reed;J. E. Light;J. M. Allen;J. J. Kirchman	2007	Pair of lice lost or parasites regained: the evolutionary history of anthropoid primate lice	BMC Biology							Background The parasitic sucking lice of primates are known to have undergone at least 25 million years of coevolution with their hosts. For example, chimpanzee lice and human head/body lice last shared a common ancestor roughly six million years ago, a divergence that is contemporaneous with their hosts. In an assemblage where lice are often highly host specific, humans host two different genera of lice, one that is shared with chimpanzees and another that is shared with gorillas. In this study, we reconstruct the evolutionary history of primate lice and infer the historical events that explain the current distribution of these lice on their primate hosts. Results Phylogenetic and cophylogenetic analyses suggest that the louse genera Pediculus and Pthirus are each monophyletic, and are sister taxa to one another. The age of the most recent common ancestor of the two Pediculus species studied matches the age predicted by host divergence (ca. 6 million years), whereas the age of the ancestor of Pthirus does not. The two species of Pthirus (Pthirus gorillae and Pthirus pubis) last shared a common ancestor ca. 3ˆ4 million years ago, which is considerably younger than the divergence between their hosts (gorillas and humans, respectively), of approximately 7 million years ago. Conclusions Reconciliation analysis determines that there are two alternative explanations that account for the current distribution of anthropoid primate lice. The more parsimonious of the two solutions suggests that a Pthirus species switched from gorillas to humans. This analysis assumes that the divergence between Pediculus and Pthirus was contemporaneous with the split (i.e., a node of cospeciation) between gorillas and the lineage leading to chimpanzees and humans. Divergence date estimates, however, show that the nodes in the host and parasite trees are not contemporaneous. Rather, the shared coevolutionary history of the anthropoid primates and their lice contains a mixture of evolutionary events including cospeciation, parasite duplication, parasite extinction, and host switching. Based on these data, the coevolutionary history of primates and their lice has been anything but parsimonious.
S2448	B. M. Wiegmann;M. D. Trautwein;J. Kim;M. Bertone;S. L. Winterton;B. K. Cassel;D. K. Yeates	2009	Nuclear genes resolve the phylogeny of the holometabolous insects	BMC Biology	7		34	10.1186/1741-7007-7-34			Evolutionary relationships among the 11 extant orders of insects that undergo complete metamorphosis, called Holometabola, remain either unresolved or contentious, but are extremely important as a context for accurate comparative biology of insect model organisms. The most phylogenetically enigmatic holometabolan insects are Strepsiptera or twisted wing parasites, whose evolutionary relationship to any other insect order is unconfirmed. They have been controversially proposed as the closest relatives of the flies, based on rDNA, and a possible homeotic transformation in the common ancestor of both groups that would make the reduced forewings of Strepsiptera homologous to the reduced hindwings of Diptera. Here we present evidence from nucleotide sequences of six single-copy nuclear protein coding genes used to reconstruct phylogenetic relationships and estimate evolutionary divergence times for all holometabolan orders. Our results strongly support Hymenoptera as the earliest branching holometabolan lineage, the monophyly of the extant orders, including the fleas, and traditionally recognized groupings of Neuropteroidea and Mecopterida. Most significantly, we find strong support for a close relationship between Coleoptera (beetles) and Strepsiptera, a previously proposed, but analytically controversial relationship. Exploratory analyses reveal that this relationship cannot be explained by long-branch attraction or other systematic biases. Bayesian divergence times analysis, with reference to specific fossil constraints, places the origin of Holometabola in the Carboniferous (355 Ma), a date significantly older than previous paleontological and morphological phylogenetic reconstructions. The origin and diversification of most extant insect orders began in the Triassic, but flourished in the Jurassic, with multiple adaptive radiations producing the astounding diversity of insect species for which these groups are so well known. These findings provide the most complete evolutionary framework for future comparative studies on holometabolous model organisms and contribute strong evidence for the resolution of the 'Strepsiptera problem', a long-standing and hotly debated issue in insect phylogenetics.
S1177	D. N. Nickrent;A. Blarer;Y. L. Qiu;R. Vidal-Russell;F. E. Anderson	2004	Phylogenetic inference in Rafflesiales: the influence of rate heterogeneity and horizontal gene transfer	BMC Evolutionary Biology							Background The phylogenetic relationships among the holoparasites of Rafflesiales have remained enigmatic for over a century. Recent molecular phylogenetic studies using the mitochondrial matR gene placed Rafflesia, Rhizanthes and Sapria (Rafflesiaceae s. str.) in the angiosperm order Malpighiales and Mitrastema (Mitrastemonaceae) in Ericales. These phylogenetic studies did not, however, sample two additional groups traditionally classified within Rafflesiales (Apodantheaceae and Cytinaceae). Here we provide molecular phylogenetic evidence using DNA sequence data from mitochondrial and nuclear genes for representatives of all genera in Rafflesiales. Results Our analyses indicate that the phylogenetic affinities of the large-flowered clade and Mitrastema, ascertained using mitochondrial matR, are congruent with results from nuclear SSU rDNA when these data are analyzed using maximum likelihood and Bayesian methods. The relationship of Cytinaceae to Malvales was recovered in all analyses. Relationships between Apodanthaceae and photosynthetic angiosperms varied depending upon the data partition: Malvales (3-gene), Cucurbitales (matR) or Fabales (atp1). The latter incongruencies suggest that horizontal gene transfer (HGT) may be affecting the mitochondrial gene topologies. The lack of association between Mitrastema and Ericales using atp1 is suggestive of HGT, but greater sampling within eudicots is needed to test this hypothesis further. Conclusion Rafflesiales are not monophyletic but composed of three or four independent lineages (families): Rafflesiaceae, Mitrastemonaceae, Apodanthaceae and Cytinaceae. Long-branch attraction appears to be misleading parsimony analyses of nuclear small-subunit rDNA data, but model-based methods (maximum likelihood and Bayesian analyses) recover a topology that is congruent with the mitochondrial matR gene tree, thus providing compelling evidence for organismal relationships. Horizontal gene transfer appears to be influencing only some taxa and some mitochondrial genes, thus indicating that the process is acting at the single gene (not whole genome) level.
S1620	R. M. D. Beck;O. R. P. Bininda-Emonds;M. Cardillo;F. G. R. Liu;A. Purvis	2006	A higher-level MRP supertree of placental mammals	BMC Evolutionary Biology							Background The higher-level phylogeny of placental mammals has long been a phylogenetic Gordian knot, with disagreement about both the precise contents of, and relationships between, the extant orders. A recent MRP supertree that favoured Œoutdated‚ hypotheses (notably, monophyly of both Artiodactyla and Lipotyphla) has been heavily criticised for including low-quality and redundant data. We apply a stringent data selection protocol designed to minimise these problems to a much-expanded data set of morphological, molecular and combined source trees, to produce a supertree that includes every family of extant placental mammals. Results The supertree is well-resolved and supports both polyphyly of Lipotyphla and paraphyly of Artiodactyla with respect to Cetacea. The existence of four Œsuperorders‚ ˆ Afrotheria, Xenarthra, Laurasiatheria and Euarchontoglires - is also supported. The topology is highly congruent with recent (molecular) phylogenetic analyses of placental mammals, but is considerably more comprehensive, being the first phylogeny to include all 113 extant families without making a priori assumptions of suprafamilial monophyly. Subsidiary analyses reveal that the data selection protocol played a key role in the major changes relative to a previously published higher-level supertree of placentals. Conclusions The supertree should provide a useful framework for hypothesis testing in phylogenetic comparative biology, and supports the idea that biogeography has played a crucial role in the evolution of placental mammals. Our results demonstrate the importance of minimising poor and redundant data when constructing supertrees.
S1540	M. Kemler;M. Goeker;D. Begerow;F. Oberwinkler	2006	Implications of molecular characters for the phylogeny of the Microbotryaceae (Basidiomycota: Urediniomycetes)	BMC Evolutionary Biology	6		35	10.1186/1471-2148-6-35			Background: Anther smuts of the basidiomycetous genus Microbotryum on Caryophyllaceae are important model organisms for many biological disciplines. Members of Microbotryum are most commonly found parasitizing the anthers of host plants in the family Caryophyllaceae, however they can also be found on the anthers of members of the Dipsacaceae, Lamiaceae, Lentibulariaceae, and Portulacaceae. Additionally, some members of Microbotryum can be found infecting other organs of mainly Polygonaceae hosts. Based on ITS nrDNA sequences of members of almost all genera in Microbotryaceae, this study aims to resolve the phylogeny of the anther smuts and their relationship to the other members of the family of plant parasites. A multiple analysis strategy was used to correct for the effects of different equally possible ITS sequence alignments on the phylogenetic outcome, which appears to have been neglected in previous studies. Results: The genera of Microbotryaceae were not clearly resolved, but alignment-independent moderate bootstrap support was achieved for a clade containing the majority of the Microbotryum species. The anther parasites appeared in two different well-supported lineages whose interrelationship remained unresolved. Whereas bootstrap support values for some clades were highly vulnerable to alignment conditions, other clades were more robustly supported. The differences in support between the different alignments were much larger than between the phylogenetic optimality criteria applied (maximum parsimony and maximum likelihood). Conclusions: The study confirmed, based on a larger dataset than previous work, that the anther smuts on Caryophyllaceae are monophyletic and that there exists a native North American group that diverged from the European clade before the radiation of the European species. Also a second group of anther smuts was revealed, containing parasites on Dipsacaceae, Lamiaceae, and Lentibulariaceae. At least the majority of the parasites of Asteraceae appeared as a monophylum, but delimitations of some species in this group should be reconsidered. Parasitism on Polygonaceae is likely to be the ancestral state for the Microbotryaceae on Eudicot hosts.
S1751	L. Rüber;M. Kottelat;H. H. Tan;P. K. L. Ng;R. Britz	2006	Evolution of miniaturization and the phylogenetic position of Paedocypris, comprising the world‚Äös smallest vertebrate	BMC Evolutionary Biology							Background: Paedocypris, a highly developmentally truncated fish from peat swamp forests in Southeast Asia, comprises the world‚s smallest vertebrate. Although clearly a cyprinid fish, a hypothesis about its phylogenetic position among the subfamilies of this largest teleost family with over 2400 species does not exist. Here we present a phylogenetic analyses of 227 cypriniform taxa, including 213 cyprinids, based upon complete mitochondrial DNA cytochrome b nucleotide sequences to determine the phylogenetic position of Paedocypris and to study the evolution of miniaturization among cyprinids. Results: Our analyses reveal a strongly supported sister group relationship (clade C) between Paedocypris and another developmentally truncated miniature cyprinid Sundadanio. Clade C was resolved as sister group of a larger clade comprised of small rasborine taxa (clade D). We found that miniaturised taxa are more numerous in the rasborine clade A, comprising clade C and D, than in any other cyprinid clade. The consensus cytb in cyprinids comprises 380 amino acids and an incomplete T-- stop codon. We noted that a few cyprinids mostly rasborine taxa placed within clade A had either a TAA or TAG stop codon, 376, 378, or 381 amino acids, and up to 10 base pairs (bp) of noncoding region before the 5‚ end of the tRNA-Thr. Relaxed molecular clock estimates revealed high divergence times for the studied Sundadanio and Paedocypris populations and provide a first temporal framework for cyprinid evolution. Conclusions: Paedocypris belongs to a clade that shows recurrent miniaturization (including both taxa characterized by developmental truncation and proportioned dwarfism) and that its closest relative is another miniaturized taxon, the genus Sundadanio. We conclude that the miniaturized cyprinids with remarkable morphological novelties like Paedocypris and Danionella are at the same time the most developmentaly truncated taxa. The miniaturized cyprinids with no or few developmental truncations like Boraras, Microrasbora, and Horadandia show no such evolutionary novelties.
S1932	T. J. Barkman;J. R. McNeal;S. H. Lim;G. Coat;H. B. Croom;N. D. Young;C. W. dePamphilis	2007	Mitochondrial DNA suggests at least 11 origins of parasitism in angiosperms and reveals genomic chimerism in parasitic plants	BMC Evolutionary Biology							Background Some of the most difficult phylogenetic questions in evolutionary biology involve identification of the free-living relatives of parasitic organisms, particularly those of parasitic flowering plants. Consequently, the number of origins of parasitism and the phylogenetic distribution of the heterotrophic lifestyle among angiosperm lineages is unclear. Results Here we report the results of a phylogenetic analysis of 102 species of seed plants designed to infer the position of all haustorial parasitic angiosperm lineages using three mitochondrial genes: atp1, coxI, and matR. Overall, the mtDNA phylogeny agrees with independent studies in terms of non-parasitic plant relationships and reveals at least 11 independent origins of parasitism in angiosperms, eight of which consist entirely of holoparasitic species that lack photosynthetic ability. From these results, it can be inferred that modern-day parasites have disproportionately evolved in certain lineages and that the endoparasitic habit has arisen by convergence in four clades. In addition, reduced taxon, single gene analyses revealed multiple horizontal transfers of atp1 from host to parasite lineage, suggesting that parasites may be important vectors of horizontal gene transfer in angiosperms. Furthermore, in Pilostyles we show evidence for a recent host-to-parasite atp1 transfer based on a chimeric gene sequence that indicates multiple historical xenologous gene acquisitions have occurred in this endoparasite. Finally, the phylogenetic relationships inferred for parasites indicate that the origins of parasitism in angiosperms are strongly correlated with horizontal acquisitions of the invasive coxI group I intron. Conclusions Collectively, these results indicate that the parasitic lifestyle has arisen repeatedly in angiosperm evolutionary history and results in increasing parasite genomic chimerism over time.
S1911	J. W. Higdon;O. R. P. Bininda-Emonds;R. M. D. Beck;S. H. Ferguson	2007	Phylogeny and divergence of the pinnipeds (Carnivora: Mammalia) assessed using a multigene dataset	BMC Evolutionary Biology							Background Phylogenetic comparative methods are often improved by complete phylogenies with meaningful branch lengths (e.g., divergence dates). This study presents a dated molecular supertree for all 34 world pinniped species derived from a weighted matrix representation with parsimony (MRP) supertree analysis of 50 gene trees, each determined under a maximum likelihood (ML) framework. Divergence times were determined by mapping the same sequence data (plus two additional genes) on to the supertree topology and calibrating the ML branch lengths against a range of fossil calibrations. We assessed the sensitivity of our supertree topology in two ways: 1) a second supertree with all mtDNA genes combined into a single source tree, and 2) likelihood-based supermatrix analyses. Divergence dates were also calculated using multidivtime to test the sensitivity of our supertree results further. Results The resulting phylogenies all agreed broadly with recent molecular studies, in particular supporting the monophyly of Phocidae, Otariidae, and the two phocid subfamilies, as well as an Odobenidae + Otariidae sister relationship; areas of disagreement were limited to four more poorly supported regions. Neither the supertree nor supermatrix analyses supported the monophyly of the two traditional otariid subfamilies, supporting suggestions for the need for taxonomic revision in this group. Phocid relationships were similar to other recent studies and deeper branches were generally well-resolved. Halichoerus grypus was nested within a paraphyletic Pusa, although relationships within Phocina tend to be poorly supported. Divergence date estimates for the supertree were in good agreement with other studies and the available fossil record; however, the multidivtime divergence date estimates were significantly older. Conclusions Our results join other recent studies and highlight the need for a re-evaluation of pinniped taxonomy, especially as regards the subfamilial classification of otariids and the generic nomenclature of Phocina. Even with the recent publication of new sequence data, the available genetic sequence information for several species, particularly those in Arctocephalus, remains very limited, especially for nuclear markers. However, resolution of parts of the tree will probably remain difficult, even with additional data, due to apparent rapid radiations. Our study addresses the lack of a recent pinniped phylogeny that includes all species and robust divergence dates for all nodes, and will therefore prove indispensable to comparative and macroevolutionary studies of this group of carnivores.
S1604	S. S. Renner;H. Schaefer;A. Kocyan	2007	Phylogenetics of Cucumis (Cucurbitaceae): C. sativus (cucumber) belongs in an Asian/Australian clade far from C. melo (melon)	BMC Evolutionary Biology	7		58	10.1186/1471-2148-7-58			Melon, Cucumis melo, and cucumber, C. sativus, are among the most widely cultivated crops worldwide. Cucumis, as traditionally conceived, is geographically centered in Africa, with C. sativus and C. hystrix thought to be the only Cucumis species in Asia. This taxonomy forms the basis for all ongoing Cucumis breeding and genomics efforts. We tested relationships among Cucumis and related genera based on DNA sequences from chloroplast gene, intron, and spacer regions (rbcL, matK, rpl20-rps12, trnL, and trnL-F), adding nuclear internal transcribed spacer sequences to resolve relationships within Cucumis. Sampling for the chloroplast loci covered 96% of the 130 genera of Cucurbitaceae. Results Analyses of the combined chloroplast sequences (4,375 aligned nucleotides) for 123 of the 130 genera of Cucurbitaceae indicate that the genera Cucumella, Dicaelospermum, Mukia, Myrmecosicyos, and Oreosyce are embedded within Cucumis. Phylogenetic trees from nuclear sequences for these taxa are congruent, and the combined data yield a well-supported phylogeny. The nesting of the five genera in Cucumis greatly changes the natural geographic range of the genus, extending it throughout the Malesian region and into Australia. The closest relative of Cucumis is Muellerargia, with one species in Australia and Indonesia, the other in Madagascar. The cucumber and its sister species, C. hystrix, are nested among Australian, Malaysian, and Western Indian species currently placed in Mukia and Dicaelospermum and in one case not yet formally described. Cucumis melo is sister to this Australian/Asian clade, rather than being close to African species as previously thought. Molecular clocks indicate that the deepest divergences in Cucumis, including the split between C. melo and its Australian/Asian sister clade, go back to the mid-Eocene (45 my). Conclusions Based on congruent nuclear and chloroplast phylogenies we conclude that Cucumis comprises an old Australian/Asian component that was heretofore unsuspected. Cucumis sativus evolved within this Australian/Asian clade and is phylogenetically far more distant from C. melo than implied by the traditional genus circumscription.
S1766	T. H. Struck;N. Schult;T. Kusen;E. Hickman;C. Bleidorn;D. McHugh;K. M. Halanych	2007	Annelid Phylogeny and the Status of Sipuncula and Echiura	BMC Evolutionary Biology							Background: Annelida comprises an ancient and ecologically important animal phylum with over 16,500 described species and members are the dominant macrofauna of the deep sea. Traditionally, two major groups are distinguished: Clitellata (including earthworms, leeches) and „Polychaeta‰ (mostly marine worms). Recent analyses of molecular data suggest that Annelida may include other taxa once considered separate phyla (i.e., Echiura, and Sipuncula) and that Clitellata are derived annelids, thus rendering „Polychaeta‰ paraphyletic; however, this contradicts classification schemes of annelids developed from recent analyses of morphological characters. Given that deep-level evolutionary relationships of Annelida are poorly understood, we have analyzed comprehensive datasets based on nuclear and mitochondrial genes, and have applied rigorous testing of alternative hypotheses so that we can move towards the robust reconstruction of annelid history needed to interpret animal body plan evolution. Results: Sipuncula, Echiura, Siboglinidae, and Clitellata are all nested within polychaete annelids according to phylogenetic analyses of three nuclear genes (18S rRNA, 28S rRNA, EF1a; 4552 nucleotide positions analyzed) for 81 taxa, and 11 nuclear and mitochondrial genes for 10 taxa (additional: 12S rRNA, 16S rRNA, ATP8, COX1-3, CYTB, NAD6; 11,454 nucleotide positions analyzed). This study substantially furthers previous findings by using approximately unbiased tests and non-scaled bootstrap probability tests to compare significance of differences between alternative hypotheses. For echiurans, the polychaete group Capitellidae is corroborated as the sister taxon; while the exact placement of Sipuncula within Annelida is still uncertain, our analyses hint at an affiliation with terebellimorphs. Siboglinids are in a clade with other sabellimorphs, and clitellates fall within a polychaete clade with aeolosomatids as their possible sister group. None of our analyses support the major polychaete clades reflected in the current classification scheme of annelids, and hypothesis testing significantly rejects monophyly of Scolecida, Palpata, Canalipalpata, and Aciculata. Conclusions: Using multiple genes and explicit hypothesis testing, we show that Echiura, Siboglinidae, and Clitellata are derived annelids with polychaete sister taxa, and that Sipuncula should be included within annelids. The traditional composition of Annelida greatly underestimates the morphological diversity of this group, and inclusion of Sipuncula and Echiura implies that patterns of segmentation within annelids have been evolutionarily labile. Relationships within Annelida based on our analyses of multiple genes challenge the current classification scheme, and some alternative hypotheses are provided.
S1918	X. Y. Zhu;M. W. Chase;Y. L. Qiu;H. Z. Kong;D. L. Dilcher;J. H. Li;Z. D. Chen	2007	Mitochondrial matR Sequences help to resolve deep phylogenetic relationships in rosids	BMC Evolutionary Biology							Background: Rosids are a major clade in the angiosperms containing 13 orders and about one-third of angiosperm species. Recent molecular analyses recognized two major groups (i.e., fabids with seven orders and malvids with three orders). However, phylogenetic relationships within the two groups and among fabids, malvids, and potentially basal rosids including Geraniales, Myrtales, and Crossosomatales remain to be resolved with more data and a broader taxon sampling. In this study, we obtained DNA sequences of the mitochondrial matR gene from 174 species representing 72 families of putative rosids and examined phylogenetic relationships and phylogenetic utility of matR in rosids. We also inferred phylogenetic relationships within the ¡°rosid clade¡± based on a combined data set of 91 taxa and four genes including matR, two plastid genes (rbcL, atpB), and one nuclear gene (18S rDNA). Results: Comparison of mitochondrial matR and two plastid genes (rbcL and atpB) showed that the synonymous substitution rate in matR was approximately four times slower than those of rbcL and atpB; however, the nonsynonymous substitution rate in matR was relatively high, close to its synonymous substitution rate, indicating that the matR has experienced a relaxed evolutionary history. Analyses of our matR sequences supported the monophyly of malvids and most orders of the rosids. However, fabids did not form a clade; instead, the COM clade of fabids (Celastrales, Oxalidales, Malpighiales, and Huaceae) was sister to malvids. Analyses of the four-gene data set suggested that Geraniales and Myrtales were successively sister to other rosids, and that Crossosomatales were sister to malvids. Conclusions: Compared to plastid genes such as rbcL and atpB, slowly evolving matR produced less homoplasious but not less informative substitutions. Thus, matR appears useful in higher-level angiosperm phylogenetics. Analysis of matR alone identified a novel deep relationship within rosids, the grouping of the COM clade of fabids and malvids, which was not resolved by any previous molecular analyses but recently suggested by floral structural features. Our four-gene analysis supported the placements of Geraniales, Myrtales at basal nodes of the rosid clade and placed Crossosomatales as sister to malvids. We also suggest that the core part of rosids should include fabids, malvids and Crossosomatales.
S2067	N. M. Evans;A. Lindner;E. V. Raikova;A. G. Collins;P. Cartwright	2008	Phylogenetic placement of the enigmatic parasite, Polypodium hydriforme, within the Phylum Cnidaria	BMC Evolutionary Biology							Background Polypodium hydriforme is a parasite with an unusual life cycle and peculiar morphology, both of which have made its systematic position uncertain. Polypodium has traditionally been considered a cnidarian because it possesses nematocysts, the stinging structures characteristic of this phylum. However, recent molecular phylogenetic studies using 18S rDNA sequence data have challenged this interpretation, and have shown that Polypodium is a close relative to myxozoans and together they share a closer affinity to bilaterians than cnidarians. Due to the variable rates of 18S rDNA sequences, these results have been suggested to be an artifact of long-branch attraction (LBA). A recent study, using multiple protein coding markers, shows that the myxozoan Buddenbrockia, is nested within the cnidarians. Polypodium was not included in this study. To further investigate the phylogenetic placement of Polypodium, we have performed phylogenetic analyses of metazoans with 18S and partial 28S rDNA sequences in a large dataset that includes Polypodium and a comprehensive sampling of cnidarian taxa. Results Analyses of a combined dataset of 18S and partial 28S sequences, and partial 28S alone, support the placement of Polypodium within Cnidaria. Removal of the long-branched myxozoans from the 18S dataset also results in Polypodium being nested within Cnidaria. These results suggest that previous reports showing Polypodium and Myxozoa form a sister group to Bilateria were an artifact of long-branch attraction. Conclusions By including 28S rDNA sequences and a comprehensive sampling of cnidarian taxa, we demonstrate that previously conflicting hypotheses concerning the phylogenetic placement of Polypodium can be reconciled. Specifically, the data presented provide evidence that Polypodium is indeed a cnidarian and is either the sister taxon to Hydrozoa, or part of the hydrozoan clade, Leptothecata. The former hypothesis is consistent with the traditional view that Polypodium should be placed in its own cnidarian class, Polypodiozoa.
S2136	M. Maruyama;F. M. Steiner;C. Stauffer;T. Akino;R. H. Crozier;B. C. Schlick-Steiner	2008	A DNA and morphology based phylogenetic framework of the ant genus Lasius with hypotheses for the evolution of social parasitism and fungiculture	BMC Evolutionary Biology							Background Ants of the genus Lasius are ecologically important and an important system for evolutionary research. Progress in evolutionary research has been hindered by the lack of a well-founded phylogeny of the subgenera, with three previous attempts disagreeing. Here we employed two mitochondrial genes (cytochrome c oxidase subunit I, 16S ribosomal RNA), comprising 1,265 bp, together with 64 morphological characters, to recover the phylogeny of Lasius by Bayesian and Maximum Parsimony inference after exploration of potential causes of phylogenetic distortion. We use the resulting framework to infer evolutionary pathways for social parasitism and fungiculture. Results We recovered two well supported major lineages. One includes Acanthomyops, Austrolasius, Chthonolasius, and Lasius pallitarsis, which we confirm to represent a seventh subgenus, the other clade contains Dendrolasius, and Lasius sensu stricto. The subgenus Cautolasius, displaying neither social parasitism nor fungiculture, probably belongs to the second clade, but its phylogenetic position is not resolved at the cutoff values of node support we apply. Possible causes for previous problems with reconstructing the Lasius phylogeny include use of other reconstruction techniques, possibly more prone to instabilities in some instances, and the inclusion of phylogenetically distorting characters. Conclusion By establishing an updated phylogenetic framework, our study provides the basis for a later formal taxonomic revision of subgenera and for studying the evolution of various ecologically and sociobiologically relevant traits of Lasius, although there is need for future studies to include nuclear genes and additional samples from the Nearctic. Both social parasitism and fungiculture evolved twice in Lasius, once in each major lineage, which opens up new opportunities for comparative analyses. The repeated evolution of social parasitism has been established for other groups of ants, though not for temporary social parasitism as found in Lasius. For fungiculture, the independent emergence twice in a monophyletic group marks a novel scenario in ants. We present alternative hypotheses for the evolution of both traits, with one of each involving loss of the trait. Though less likely for both traits than later evolution without reversal, we consider reversal as sufficiently plausible to merit independent testing.
S1976	C. Poux;O. Madsen;J. Glos;W. W. d Jong;M. Vences	2008	Molecular phylogeny and divergence times of Malagasy tenrecs: influence of data partitioning and taxon sampling on dating analyses	BMC Evolutionary Biology							Background: Malagasy tenrecs belong to the Afrotherian clade of placental mammals and comprise three subfamilies divided in eight genera (Tenrecinae: Tenrec, Echinops, Setifer and Hemicentetes; Oryzorictinae: Oryzorictes, Limnogale and Microgale; Geogalinae: Geogale). The diversity of their morphology and incomplete taxon sampling made it difficult until now to resolve phylogenies based on either morphology or molecular data for this group. Therefore, in order to delineate the evolutionary history of this family, phylogenetic and dating analyses were performed on a four nuclear genes dataset (ADRA2B, AR, GHR and vWF) including all Malagasy tenrec genera. Moreover, the influence of both taxon sampling and data partitioning on the accuracy of the estimated ages were assessed. Results: Within Afrotheria the vast majority of the nodes received a high support, including the grouping of hyrax with sea cow and the monophyly of both Afroinsectivora (Macroscelidea + Afrosoricida) and Afroinsectiphillia (Tubulidentata + Afroinsectivora). Strongly supported relationships were also recovered among all tenrec genera allowing us to unravel as yet unknown phylogenetic relations: the grouping of Geogale with Oryzorictinae and the possible nesting of Limnogale within the genus Microgale. The timeline of Malagasy tenrec diversification does not reflect a fast adaptive radiation after the arrival on Madagascar, indicating that morphological specializations have appeared over the whole evolutionary history of the family, and not just in a short period after colonization. Our results demonstrated that age estimates at the root of a clade became older with increased taxon sampling of that clade. Moreover an augmentation of data partitions resulted in older age estimates as well, whereas standard deviations increased when more extreme partition schemes were used. Conclusion: Our results provide the first resolved gene tree comprising all Malagasy tenrec genera, and may lead to revision of tenrec taxonomy. On this solid phylogenetic framework a timeframe of tenrec evolution was built and showed that morphological specializations of the tenrecs may have been affected by environmental changes caused by climatic and/or subsequent colonization events. Analyses including various taxon sampling and data partitions allow us to point out some possible pitfalls that may lead to biased results in molecular dating; however, further analyses are needed to corroborate these observations.
S1968	M. Ryberg;R. H. Nilsson;E. Kristiansson;M. Töpel;S. Jacobsson;E. Larsson	2008	Mining metadata from unidentified ITS sequences in GenBank: a case study in Inocybe (Basidiomycota)	BMC Evolutionary biology							Background: The lack of reference sequences from well-identified mycorrhizal fungi often poses a challenge to the inference of taxonomic affiliation of sequences from environmental samples, and many sequences are thus left unidentified. Such unidentified sequences belonging to the widely distributed ectomycorrhizal fungal genus Inocybe were retrieved from GenBank and divided into species that were identified in a phylogenetic context through a reference dataset from an ongoing study of the genus. Sequence metadata stored in GenBank, as well as data from the corresponding original papers, were compiled and used to explore the ecology and distribution of the genus. In addition, the relative occurrence of Inocybe was contrasted to other mycorrhizal genera. Results: Most species of Inocybe were found to have less than 3% intraspecific variability in the ITS2 region of the nuclear ribosomal DNA. This cut-off value was used jointly with phylogenetic analysis to delimit and identify unidentified Inocybe sequences to species level. A total of 177 unidentified Inocybe ITS sequences corresponding to 98 species were recovered, 32% of which were successfully identified to species level in this study. These sequences accounts for an unexpectedly large proportion of the publicly available unidentified fungal ITS sequences when compared with other mycorrhizal genera. Eight Inocybe species were reported from multiple hosts and some even from hosts forming arbutoid or orchid mycorrhizae. Furthermore, Inocybe sequences have been reported from four continents and in climate zones ranging from cold temperate to equatorial climate. Out of the 19 species found in more than one study, six were found in both Europe and North America and one was found in both Europe and Japan, indicating that at least many north temperate species have a wide distribution. Conclusions: Although DNA-based species identification and circumscription are associated with practical and conceptual difficulties, they also offer new possibilities and avenues for research. Metadata assembly holds great potential to synthesize valuable information from community studies for use in a species and taxonomy-oriented framework.
S1907	M. V. Sanchez-Puerta;Y. Cho;J. P. Mower;A. J. Alverson;J. Gummow;J. D. Palmer	2008	Horizontal transfer of cox1 group I intron among flowering plants: assessing the variation in the coconversion tract	BMC Evolutionary Biology							Horizontal gene transfer (HGT) is surprisingly common among plant mitochondrial genomes. The first well-established case of HGT in plants involves a group I intron in the mitochondrial cox1 gene. The highly sporadic presence of the intron across angiosperms, strongly supported conflicts between organismal and intron phylogenies, and evidence from coconversion tracts combine to suggest frequent horizontal transfer of the cox1 intron aided by the intron-encoded, site-specific endonuclease. Here we report extensive additional sampling of angiosperms, including discovery of 92 newly sequenced introns from 43 families. Analysis of all available data leads us to conclude that, among the 686 angiosperms whose cox1 intron status has been characterized thus far, the intron has been acquired by approximately 60 separate horizontal transfer events. Extended sampling of three families (Marantaceae, Rhamnaceae, Rubiaceae) reveals what appears to be surprisingly frequent transfer between members of the same family, while a similar conclusion was published in an earlier study on the Araceae. Illegitimate pollination is proposed as the responsible mechanism, given that cross-species pollination is more likely between relatively close relatives. The first cases of apparent loss of the cox1 intron are reported; these are accompanied by either retention or loss of the exonic coconversion tract located in exon 2, immediately downstream of the intron and itself a product of the intron‚s self-insertion mechanism. We propose three possible hypotheses to explain the presence of different length coconversion tracts among close relatives with highly related intron sequences. One hypothesis posits multiple intron transfers among these closely related plants, with limited exonucleolytic degradation in exon 2 at the time of transfer leading to shortened coconversion tracts. Second, partial conversion of exon 2 with a foreign, intronless allele of cox1 could erase part of the coconversion tract. Third, lineage sorting could lead to differential transmission of polymorphic coconversion tracts tracing back to the intron‚s original establishment within a founder plant to species within a clade of strictly vertically transmitted intron sequences.
S2223	A. Zaldivar-Riverón;M. R. Shaw;A. G. Sáez;M. Mori;S. A. Belokobylskij;S. R. Shaw	2008	Evolution of the parasitic wasp subfamily Rogadinae (Braconidae): phylogeny and evolution of lepidopteran host ranges and mummy characteristics	BMC Evolutionary Biology							Background: The braconid subfamily Rogadinae is a large, cosmopolitan group of endoparasitoid wasps characterised by Œmummifying‚ their lepidopteran host larvae, from which the adult subsequently emerges. Rogadines attack a variety of both macro- and microlepidopteran taxa, although the speciose genus Aleiodes almost exclusively attacks macrolepidopterans. Here, we investigate the phylogenetic history of the Rogadinae, revise their higher-level classification and assess the evolution of their host ranges and mummy types. We also assess the divergence times within the subfamily and discuss the reasons for the extraordinary evolutionary diversification of Aleiodes. Results: Our Bayesian analyses weakly support the monophyly of the subfamily. A clade with most of the Aleiodes species is not nested within the tribe Rogadini as previously supposed, but instead is recovered as sister to the Yeliconini, with the remaining Rogadini genera being recovered as sister to the Stiropiini. The Rogadinae is estimated to have originated during the mid to late Eocene, 36.1ˆ51.62 MYA. Molecular dating gives a more recent origin for the Aleiodes clade (17.98ˆ41.76 MYA) compared to the origins proposed for two of its principal lepidopteran host groups (Noctuidae: 60.7-113.4 MYA; Geometridae 48-62 MYA). The Bayesian ancestral reconstruction of the emergence habits from the mummified hosts weakly recovered an anterior emergence as the ancestral condition for the subfamily. Producing a hard mummy has evolved at various times independently, though most of the species with this biology belong the Aleiodes clade. Conclusion: Based on our results, we erect the tribe Aleiodini nov. to include Aleiodes and Heterogamus stat. rev. Cordylorhogas, Pholichora and Hemigyroneuron are synonymised with Aleiodes. The molecular dating of clades and the ancestral reconstruction of host ranges support the hypothesis that radiation within Aleiodes s. s. was due to host recruitment leading to host range expansion followed by speciation, and not to parasitoid-host coevolution. Within the Rogadinae, variation in the site of emergence from the mummified host probably evolved as a consequence of the mummy‚s site and mode of formation, and the extent of mummy tanning/hardness to the degree of protection needed in relation to the cost of providing it.
S2424	C. Bleidorn;L. Podsiadlowski;M. Zhong;I. Eeckhaut;S. Hartmann;K. M. Halanych;R. Tiedemann	2009	On the phylogenetic position of Myzostomida: can 77 genes get it wrong?	BMC Evolutionary Biology	9		150	10.1186/1471-2148-9-150			Background: Phylogenomic analyses recently became popular to address questions about deep metazoan phylogeny. Ribosomal proteins (RP) dominate many of these analyses or are, in some cases, the only genes included. Despite initial hopes, phylogenomic analyses including tens to hundreds of genes still fail to robustly place many bilaterian taxa. Results: Using the phylogenetic position of myzostomids as an example, we show that phylogenies derived from RP genes and mitochondrial genes produce incongruent results. Whereas the former support a position within a clade of platyzoan taxa, mitochondrial data recovers an annelid affinity, which is strongly supported by the gene order data and is congruent with morphology. Using hypothesis testing, our RP data significantly rejects the annelids affinity, whereas a platyzoan relationship is significantly rejected by the mitochondrial data. Conclusions: We conclude (i) that reliance of a set of markers belonging to a single class of macromolecular complexes might bias the analysis, and (ii) that concatenation of all available data might introduce conflicting signal into phylogenetic analyses. We therefore strongly recommend testing for data incongruence in phylogenomic analyses. Furthermore, judging all available data, we consider the annelid affinity hypothesis more plausible than a possible platyzoan affinity for myzostomids, and suspect long branch attraction is influencing the RP data. However, this hypothesis needs further confirmation by future analyses.
S2303	P. Q. Spinks;R. C. Thomson;G. A. Lovely;H. Bradley Shaffer	2009	Assessing what is needed to resolve a molecular phylogeny: simulations and empirical data from Emydid turtles	BMC Evolutionary Biology	9		56	10.1186/1471-2148-9-56			Background Phylogenies often contain both well-supported and poorly supported nodes. Determining how much additional data might be required to eventually recover most or all nodes with high support is an important pragmatic goal, and simulations have been used to examine this question. Most simulations have been based on few empirical loci, and suggest that well supported phylogenies can be determined with a very modest amount of data. Here we report the results of an empirical phylogenetic analysis of all 10 genera and 25 of 48 species of the new world pond turtles (family Emydidae) based on one mitochondrial (1070 base pairs) and seven nuclear loci (5961 base pairs), and a more biologically realistic simulation analysis aimed at determining how much more data might be necessary to recover weakly-supported nodes with strong support. Results Our mitochondrial-based phylogeny was well resolved, and congruent with some previous mitochondrial results. For example, all genera, and all species except Pseudemys concinna, P. peninsularis, and Terrapene carolina were monophyletic with strong support from at least one analytical method. The Emydinae was recovered as monophyletic, but the Deirochelyinae was not. Based on nuclear data, all genera were monophyletic with strong support except Trachemys, and all species except Graptemys pseudogeographica, P. concinna, T. carolina, and T. coahuila were monophyletic, generally with strong support. However, the branches subtending most genera were relatively short, and intergeneric relationships within subfamilies were mostly unsupported. Our simulations showed that relatively high bootstrap support values (i.e. &#8805; 70) for all nodes were reached in all datasets, but an increase in data did not necessarily equate to an increase in support values. However, simulations based on a single empirical locus reached higher overall levels of support with less data than did the simulations that were based on all seven empirical nuclear loci, and symmetric tree distances were much lower for single versus multiple gene simulation analyses. Conclusions Our empirical results provide new insights into the phylogenetics of the Emydidae, but the short branches recovered deep in the tree also indicate the need for additional work on this clade to recover all intergeneric relationships with confidence and to delimit species for some problematic groups. Our simulation results suggest that moderate (in the few-to-tens of kb range) amounts of data are necessary to recover most emydid relationships with high support values. They also suggest that previous simulations that do not incorporate among-gene tree topological variance probably greatly underestimate the amount of data needed to recover well-supported phylogenies.
S1459	M. J. Yoo;V. A. Albert;P. S. Soltis;D. E. Soltis	2006	Phylogenetic diversification of glycogen synthase kinase 3/ SHAGGY-like kinase genes in plants	BMC Plant Biology							Background: The glycogen synthase kinase 3 (GSK3)/SHAGGY-like kinases (GSKs) are non-receptor serine/threonine protein kinases that are involved in a variety of biological processes. In contrast to the two members of the GSK3 family in mammals, plants appear to have a much larger set of divergent GSK genes. Plant GSKs are encoded by a multigene family; analysis of the Arabidopsis genome revealed the existence of 10 GSK genes that fall into four major groups. Here we characterized the structure of Arabidopsis and rice GSK genes and conducted the first broad phylogenetic analysis of the plant GSK gene family, covering a taxonomically diverse array of algal and land plant sequences. Results: We found that the structure of GSK genes is generally conserved in Arabidopsis and rice, although we documented examples of exon loss and intron expansion. Our phylogenetic analyses of 139 sequences revealed four major clades of GSK genes that correspond to the four subgroups initially recognized in Arabidopsis. ESTs from basal angiosperms were represented in all four major clades; GSK homologs from the basal angiosperm Persea americana (avocado) appeared in all four clades. Gymnosperm sequences occurred in clades I, III, and IV, and a sequence of the red alga Porphyra was sister to all green plant sequences. Conclusions: Our results indicate that (1) the plant-specific GSK gene lineage was established early in the history of green plants, (2) plant GSKs began to diversify prior to the origin of extant seed plants, (3) three of the four major clades of GSKs present in Arabidopsis and rice were established early in the evolutionary history of extant seed plants, and (4) diversification into four major clades (as initially reported in Arabidopsis) occurred either just prior to the origin of the angiosperms or very early in angiosperm history.
S359	O. R. P. Bininda-Emonds;A. P. Russell	1996	A morphological perspective on the phylogenetic relationships of the extant phocid seals (Mammalia: Carnivora: Phocidae)	Bonner zoologische Monographien	41		1-256				The phocid seals present an interesting puzzle within mammalian systematics. The undue attention focused on their contentious ancestral affinities (together with the ongoing debate over pinniped origins) has contributed, in part, to their internal phylogeny remaining reasonably poorly studied. Therefore, a species-level cladistic analysis was undertaken to resolve the overall phylogeny of this family. All Recent phocid species were examined (including Monachus tropicalis), using representatives of all major extant caniform lineages as outgroups. 168 morphological characters (primarily osteological, and primarily those of the head skeleton) were examined.
S11x5x95c16c18c40	P. Kenrick;P. R. Crane	1991	Water-conducting cells in early fossil land plants: Implications for the early evolution of tracheophytes	Botanical Gazette	152	3	335-356				Wall structure in the water-conducting cells of Rhynia gwynne- vaughanii and Asteroxylon mackiei from the Lower Devonian Rhynie Chert was examined and compared using thin sections and scanning electron microscopy of etched sections. Although the internal thickenings of these cells are superficially similar in both plants, there are significant differences in other aspects of wall structure. The tracheids of A. mackiei are shown to be of a basic type (G-type) that is common in some early land plant fossils such as zosterophylls and lycopods, and they are comparable to protoxylem elements in some extant 'pteridophytes'. The tracheids of R. gwynne-vaughanii are more similar to another kind of water-conducting cell (S-type) that combines certain features of tracheids and moss hydroids. The S-type cell is known from two other Lower Devonian sporophytes, Stockmansella langii and Huvenia kleui, supporting recent suggestions that these three taxa form a natural group. S-type cells are also found in the gametophyte Sciadophyton sp. as well as two taxa, Sennicaulis hippocrepiformis and Taeniocrada dubia, for which reproductive structures are unknown. The water-conducting tissues of other early land plants are briefly reviewed and detailed reconstructions of the S-type and G-type cell are provided. A preliminary cladistic analysis focusing on the Rhyniophytina of Banks results in the recognition of a 'protracheophyte' grade, as well as a small clade, the Rhyniaceae, comprising Rhynia, Stockmansella, and Huvenia. If the tracheid- like features of S-type and G-type cells are regarded as homologous, then the Rhyniaceae are resolved as the basal clade that forms the sister group to all other tracheophytes. The occurrence of a more or less isomorphic alternation of generations in some Devonian 'protracheophytes' and the Rhyniaceae implies that the gametophytes of all extant 'pteridophytes' are phylogenetically reduced.
S2x3x96c12c21c25	P. Y. Ladiges;C. J. Humphries	1983	A cladistic study of Arillastrum, Angophora, and Eucalyptus (Myrtaceae)	Botanical Journal of the Linnean Society	87		105-134				Transformed cladistic; character compatibility; branch and bound, and Farris-Wagner methods gave similar solutions in a cladistic study of Arillastrum, Angophora and Eucalyptus. These analyses, based on morphological characters, indicate that Eucalyptus is a monophyletic group and that its sister taxon is Angophora. Within Eucalyptus, subgenera Blakella and Corymbia are sister taxa to all other groups; subgenera Monocalyptus, Idiogenes and Gaubaea form a monophyletic group with subgenus Monocalyptus sister to subgenera Idiogenes and Gaubaea; subgenera Symphyomyrtus and Telocalyptus together also form a monophyletic group and, with Eucalyptus similis (subgenus Eudesmia group 4), are sister to the Monocalyptus group. Eucalyptus subgenus Telocalyptus (4 species), Eucalyptus subgenus Idiogenes (1 species) and Eucalyptus subgenus Gaubaea (2 species) should not be recognized as subgenera and some individual species need further examination. Eucalyptus subgenus Eudesmia is a paraphyletic group. Some characters are identified as parallelisms, e.g. axillary inflorescences, sepaline operculum, bristle glands, and clustered anthers. A more congruent interpretation of the single operculum of Eucalyptus subgenus Monocalyptus as at least partly petaline rather than solely sepaline in origin is suggested . The area relationships for the taxa are concordant with those derived from geological and climatological information. New Caledonia is sister area to Australia, and within Australia south-western Australia is sister area to south-eastern and north-eastern Australia.
S230	B. R. Baum;D. B. O. Saville	1985	Rusts (Uredinales) of Triticeae: Evolution and extent of coevolution, a cladistic analysis	Botanical Journal of the Linnean Society	91		367-394				Established evolutionary trends in Uredinales as a whole are reviewed, and primitive and advanced characters are presented. The rusts of all Poaceae are presented in a table that strongly indicates Bambusoideae to be the oldest and Pooideae the youngest subfamily. The rusts of Triticeae and their ecogeography are outlined; the rusts of Cyperaceae, selected as an out-group, are briefly summarized; and the available characters and character states for rusts of Triticeae are given. Host alternation complicates the analysis. The aecial host (never a grass) is ecologically associated with the unrelated telial (grass) host. There are no appropriate methods to permit analysis of the combined components: aecial host evolution, telial host evolution, rust evolution, and their coevolution. Also, several aecial hosts are unknown. Consequently it was necessary to omit aecial hosts from the analysis. Cladistic analysis of the rusts of Triticeae was performed using five methods and consisted of cycles of tree analysis and modification of character state trees. A cladogram put together from a Dollo and a Wagner cladogram was used as a basis for the classification of rusts given. Subsequently a cladistic analysis of genera of Triticeae, using presence/absence of rusts as characters (Brooks' approach) was performed. The Triticeae cladogram of Baum (1983) was also analysed. Distances between the cladogram generated by various methods and that of Baum were computed for each possible pair, using the method of Robinson & Foulds, and then the resulting distance matrix was reduced in dimensionality by principal components and non-metric multidimensional scaling. The results are discussed in light of the limitation of the analyses and the data. It is concluded that coevolution is limited and that frequent jumps to ecologically associated hosts explain the parallelism in evolution of rusts on Triticeae.
S268	J. S. Pate;J. Kuo;K. W. Dixon;M. D. Crisp	1989	Anomalous secondary thickening in roots of Daviesia (Fabaceae) and its taxonomic significance	Botanical Journal of the Linnean Society	99		175-193				Investigations of 55 species of Daviesia show 24 to have anomalous secondary vascular development in their roots and the remainder to be of conventional root anatomy. Species showing the trait exhibit early cessation of cambial activity in the central stele of the seedling followed by differentiation of a series of concentric layers of inter-connecting vascular strands, each layer derived from new cambial activity in pericycle tissue outside the existing vasculature. The ontogeny and mature structure of the anomalously thickened roots of certain species is described and the findings compared with published data for other genera of dicotyledons. A cladogram is presented to portray the phylogeny of the species of Daviesia included in the study, using 36 morphological features and the parsimony method to derive minimum length Wagner-type trees from a matrix of taxa character states. Evolution of the character of anomalous root thickening is concluded to have occurred early and possibly on two independent occasions during speciation of the genus.
S1x29x96c15c29c04	P. Elden„s	1990	The genus Perralderia Cosson (Asteraceae-Inuleae-Inulinae)	Botanical Journal of the Linnean Society	102		157-173				The North African genus Perralderia (Asteraceae-Inuleae-Inulinae) is revised. Three species and two subspecies are recognized. The systematic position, phylogeny and biogeography of the genus are also discussed.
S1x28x96c13c56c45	A. A. Anderberg;S. A. Freire	1991	A cladistic and biogeographic analysis of the Lucilia group (Asteraceae, Gnaphalieae)	Botanical Journal of the Linnean Society	106		173-198				The Lucilia group (Asteraceae, Inuleae- Gnaphaliinae) sensu Merxmuller el al. is revisited and its phylogeny analysed by means of computerized parsimony program (Hennig86). Cladograms and strict consensus trees are presented and discussed. A sequential model of the vicariance biogeography of the Lucilia group is presented and its implications on the historical biogeography of South America is discussed. The following genera are recognized as belonging to the group: Belloa, Berroa, Chevreulia, Cualrecasasiella ( = Luciliopsis auct.), Facelis, Jalcophila and Lucilia. Also belonging to the Lucilia group are the two genera Gamochaetopsis and Luciliocline. A key is given to the nine recognized genera, each of which is described here with brief descriptions and lists of recognized species.
S2x3x96c13c13c27	J. C. Manning;P. Goldblatt	1991	Systematic and phylogenetic significance of the seed coat in the shrubby African Iridaceae Nivenia, Klattia, and Witsenia	Botanical Journal of the Linnean Society	107		387-404				The seeds of Nivenia, Klattia and Witsenia, a natural alliance within Nivenioideae, are among their most distinctive features, and seed number and shape constitute at least two synapomorphies for this monophyletic lineage. In this paper we survey the structure of the seed surface of five species of Nivenia and one each of Klattia and Witsenia by scanning electron microsopy (SEM), and study the development of the seed coat in a representative species of each of the three genera. Outgroups for comparison were selected from genera inside and outside the subfamily. The six genera of Nivenioideae are united in having a 3(—2) seriate outer integument but the shrubby genera are unique in the family in their tangentially flattened ovules which mature into depressed, flat, scutiform seeds. They display a range of variation in seed coat characters but are specialized in the subfamily and family in having a transparent outer integument. Other genera have pigmented deposits in the outer epidermis of the outer integument. Nivenia and Witsenia are further specialized in having a partially exfoliating outer integument. Klattia is unique among the shrubby genera in having deposits in the second layer of the tegmen, in retaining an intact outer epidermis of the tegmen, and in the fusiform shape of the epidermal cells and striate surface of the seed. Our results are incorporated in a cladogram that expresses our current understanding of the phylogenetic relationships of Nivenioideae.
S2x3x96c16c41c14	P. Rudall;P. Goldblatt	1991	Leaf anatomy and phylogeny of Ixioideae (Iridaceae)	Botanical Journal of the Linnean Society	106		329-345				Leaf anatomy is described in Ixioideae, the largest subfamily of Iridaceae, with particular reference to phylogeny and systematics. Leaves in many genera have two rows Or opposing vascular bundles (found also in many other Iridaceae), sometimes (except in e.g. Pillansia) combined with typical ixioid features such as a prominent pseudomidrib, mesophyll cells often elongated at right angles to the leaf axis, and epidermal cells also sometimes slightly laterally elongated, frequently with markedly sinuous anticlinal walls, and a single row of papillae per cell. Other characters are limited to a few genera. Anatomical characters are used together with data from other sources to construct a cladogram for the group. Although anatomical characters in general show much homoplasy, the relationships of the existing three tribes, Pillansieae, Watsonieae and Ixieae, diagnosed mainly on the basis of floral and inflorescence characters, are largely upheld by analysis, with at least two potentially useful subtribal groupings within Ixieae.
S704	S. Liede;U. Meve;A. Täuber	2002	What is the subtribe Glossonematinae (Apocynaceae: Asclepiadoideae)? A phylogenetic analysis based on cpDNA spacer	Botanical Journal of the Linnean Society	139	2	145-158	10.1046/j.1095-8339.2002.00048.x		Asclepiadeae; classification; DNA-sequences; karyology; morphology; trnT-L spacer; trnL intron; trnL-F spacer	Evidence from the chloroplast trnT-L spacer, trnL intron and trnL-F spacer shows the subtribe Glossonematinae of the tribe Asclepiadeae, hitherto composed of the Arabian and North African genera Glossonema, Odontanthera and Solenostemma, to be non-monoyphyletic. While the affinities of Solenostemma cannot be determined with certainty at present, molecular, karyological and morphological evidence suggests that Glossonema and Odontanthera are closely allied to Pentarrhinum, an African genus of five species, belonging to the Cynanchinae.
S1836	S. Namoff;H. E. B. Thorton;C. E. Lewis;R. Oviedo;J. Francisco-Ortega	2007	Molecular evidence for phylogenetic relationships of Jacquemontia reclinata House (Convolvulaceae) ÀÜ A critically endangered species from South Florida	Botanical Journal of the Linnean Society							Jacquemontia reclinata House (Convolvulaceae) is a federally listed endangered species endemic to coastal strand habitat of southeastern Florida. In order to identify the closest relatives of J. reclinata, a phylogenetic reconstruction was performed based on nucleotide sequence data from the internal transcribed spacer region of nuclear ribosomal DNA and from the trnH-psbA intergenic spacer of chloroplast DNA. We included the three putative relatives of J. reclinata and the majority of Jacquemontia Choicy species known to occur in the Caribbean Islands. The strict consensus tree concurs with previous morphological studies, indicating that J. reclinata is closely related to the Caribbean species J. cayensis Britton, J. curtisii Hallier f., and J. havanensis (Jacq.) Urb. These three species and J. reclinata form an unresolved clade. Nucleotide divergence within this clade is low, suggesting that the group is recent, perhaps diversifying after the latest glacial period. These taxa need to be study further using population level DNA markers. Most species endemic to the Caribbean Basin form a strongly supported clade. Our phylogeny supports Convolvulus nodiflorus Desr. as part of Jacquemontia. In addition, J. ovalifolia (West) Hallier f. subsp. sandwicensis (A. Gray) K.R. Robertson is sister to the Antillean endemic J. solanifolia (L.) Hallier f.
S2103	A. Molina;C. Acedo;F. Llamas	2008	Taxonomy and new taxa of the Carex divulsa aggregate in Eurasia (section Phaestoglochin, Cyperaceae)	Botanical Journal of the Linnean Society	156	3	385-409				The Carex divulsa aggregate, belonging to the Carex muricata group in section Phaestoglochin (Cyperaceae), was studied using 60 macro- and micromorphological characters over a wider geographical range than has been attempted previously, and the status or identity of several taxa commonly associated with this aggregate was examined. The results of numerical analysis support the recognition of six new species within the Carex divulsa aggregate, which are also in accordance with their geographical circumscription. Carex cyprica is endemic to Cyprus, C. enokii is from the Mediterranean Basin, C. magacis from the mountains of Spain and France, C. nordica from Northern Europe, and C. egorovae and C. otomana from Eastern Europe and Central Asia. The morphological data were coded and used in a phylogenetic analysis to discover the relationships between taxa. A key to all taxa belonging to the aggregate is included. Diagnostic characters, illustrations, and detailed descriptions of all species are given. Notes on the habitat, distribution, phenology, etymology, and conservation status of each taxon are also presented.
S2567	H. E. Ireland;G. C. Kite;N. C. Veitch;M. W. Chase;B. D. Schrire;M. Lavin;R. T. Pennington	2010	Biogeographic, ecological, and morphological structure of a phylogenetic analysis of Ateleia (Swartzieae-Leguminosae) derived from combined molecular and morphological/chemical data	Botanical Journal of the Linnean Society	162	1	39-53	10.1111/j.1095-8339.2009.01016.x			
S2x5x96c17c56c45	J. A. Doyle;M. D. Donoghue	1986	Seed plant phylogeny and the origin of angiosperms: An experimental cladistic approach	Botanical Review	52		321-431				We present a numerical cladistic (parsimony) analysis of seed plants plus progymnosperms, using characters from all parts of the plant body, outgroup comparison, and a method of character coding that avoids biases for or against alternative morphological theories. The robustness of the results was tested by construction of alternative trees and analysis of subsets of the data. These experiments show that although some clades are strongly supported, they can often be related to each other in very different but nearly equally parsimonious ways, apparently because of extensive homoplasy. Our results support Rothwell's idea that coniferopsids are derived from Callistophyton-like platyspermic seed ferns with saccate pollen, but the hypothesis that they evolved from Archaeopteris-like progymnosperms and the seed arose twice is nearly as parsimonious. Meyen's division of seed plants into radiospermic and primarily and secondarily platyspermic lines is highly unparsimonious, but his suggestion that ginkgos are related to peltasperms deserves attention. Angiosperms belong among the platyspermic groups, as the sister group of Bennettitales, Pentoxylon, and Gnetales, and this anthophyte clade is best related to Caytonia and glossopterids, although relationships with other combinations of Mesozoic seed fern taxa are nearly as parsimonious. These results imply that the angiosperm carpel can be interpreted as a modified pinnate sporophyll bearing anatropous cupules (=bitegmic ovules), while gnetalian strobili are best interpreted as aggregations of highly reduced bennettitalian flowers, as anticipated by Arber and Parkin and Crane. Our most parsimonious trees imply that the angiosperm line (though not necessarily all its modern features) extended back to the Triassic, but a later derivation of angiosperms from some species of Caytonia or Bennettitales, which would be nearly as parsimonious, should also be considered. These results raise the possibility that many features considered key adaptations in the origin and rise of angiosperms (insect-pollinated flowers, rapid reproduction, drought tolerance) were actually inherited from their gymnospermous precursors. The explosive diversification of angiosperms may instead have been a consequence of carpel closure, resulting in increased speciation rates due to potential for stigmatic isolating mechanisms and/or new means of dispersal. DNA sequencing of extant plants and better information on anatomy, chemistry, sporophyll morphology, and embryology of Bennettitales and Caytoniales and the morphological diversity of Mesozoic anthophytes could provide critical tests of relationships.
S452	E. A. Kellogg;L. Watson	1993	Phylogenetic studies of a large data set. I. Bambusoideae, Andropogonidae, and Pooidae (Graminae)	Botanical Review	59		273-343				Figure 7, morphology (1 of 5000 MP trees) in Kellogg and Watson 1993.
S2365	D. M. Wang;S. H. Wu;C. H. Su;J. T. Peng;Y. H. Shih;L. C. Chen	2009	Ganoderma multipileum, the correct name for "G. lucidum" in tropical Asia	Botanical Studies	50		451-458				Ganoderma lucidum (generic type), originally described from England, has been reported worldwide. In the Orient, an economically important fungus commonly known as ¡®ling-zhi¡¯ or ¡®chi-zhi¡¯ for more than 2000 years, has also been named G. lucidum. However, the identity of the Oriental fungus has been questioned in recent years. Earlier molecular studies suggested that G. lucidum sensu stricto may be restricted to Europe, and ¡®G. lucidum¡¯ in Asia consists of at least two distinct species, one represented by material from mainland China and one by tropical Asian collections. This study attempts to clarify the identity of ¡®G. lucidum¡¯ in tropical Asia, with special emphasis on wild collections from Taiwan. The internal transcribed spacer (ITS) region of nuclear ribosomal DNA (nrDNA) of related species and strains were sequenced and phylogenetic analyses were conducted. The results confirmed that G. lucidum is a mistakenly applied name to Oriental collections. The forgotten name Ganoderma multipileum presented over half a century ago from Taiwan, was found in this study as the earliest valid name for ¡®G. lucidum¡¯ known from tropical Asia.
S2416	Z. H. Yu;S. H. Wu;D. M. Wang;C. T. Chen	2010	Phylogenetic relationships of Antrodia species and related taxa based on analyses of nuclear large subunit ribosomal DNA sequences	Botanical Studies	51		53-60				This study aimed to evaluate relationships of Antrodia species and related taxa, including the taxonomic status of some Antrodia species that have been treated as separate genera (Amyloporia, Fibroporia, and Taiwanofungus). A comprehensive phylogenetic study of Homobasidiomycetes presented by Binder et al. in 2005, was consulted for sampling the taxa used for this analysis. The genera of the ¡°residual¡± polyporoid clade and phlebioid clade of the Homobasidiomycetes were chosen as outgroups, and the genera belonging to the Antrodia clade and core polyporoid clade were selected as ingroup. Phylogenetic analyses of this study were based on sequence data derived from the nuclear large subunit ribosomal DNA (nuc-LSU rDNA). The analytical methods of maximum parsimony (MP), maximum likelihood (ML), and Bayesian inference (BI) were used. Results from these different analyses were generally consistent. Two main clades lacking high support were detected in the ingroup. Clade A consisted of taxa of the Antrodia clade, including all 12 studied Antrodia species and members of four other genera: Daedalea, Fomitopsis, Neolentiporus, and Piptoporus. The 12 Antrodia species were not clustered into a distinct subclade, indicating that Antrodia is not a monophyletic group. Two species of Fibroporia (belonging to Antrodia sensu lato), characterized by having a fruiting body with a rhizomorphic margin, clustered together with very strong support. Five species with amyloid skeletal hyphae, diagnostic of Amyloporia, did not group together. The generic status of Fibroporia, but not Amyloporia, was supported in this study. Clade B consisted of the genera of the core polyporoid clade. Both species of the recently established genus Taiwanofungus formed a distinct subclade, supporting its generic status.
S11x5x95c12c01c46	T. Eriksson	1990	Reinstatement of the genus Leucoblepharis Arnott (Ateraceae--Heliantheae)	Botanische Jahrbücher für Systematik, Pflanzengeschichte und Pflanzengeographie	112		167-191				The genera of the Blepharispermum group, viz. Athroisma, Blepharispermum and Leucoblepharis form a monophyletic group within the subtribe Ecliptinae of the tribe Heliantheae. The intergeneric boundaries are analysed using cladistic methodology on morphological data by means of a computerized parsimony program. All currently recognized species in the three genera were included in the analysis in which 120 equally parsimonious cladograms were found. A consensus tree is presented along with one of the most parsimonious cladograms chosen by successive weighting. The genera Athroisma and Blepharispermum are shown to be well delimited if one species, Blepharispermum subsessile, is excluded and placed in a separate genus. The genus Leucoblepharis, usually treated as a congener of Blepharispermum, is here reinstated. A key to and short descriptions of the three genera are supplied along with a more detailed treatment of Leucoblepharis.
S225	M. C. E. Amaral	1991	Phylogenetische systematik der Ochnaceae	Botanische Jahrbücher für Systematik, Pflanzengeschichte und Pflanzengeographie	113		105-196				A cladistic analysis of the family Ochnaceae is presented. It was performed using 91 morphological and anatomical characters from representatives of all genera of the subfamily Sauvagesioideae as well as from six genera of the subfamily Ochnoideae. Polarity of character states was established using the outgroup comparison-method, with Quiinaceae and Scytopetalaceae as outgroups. Based on the cladograms it is possible to characterize the Ochnaceae and their subfamilies Ochnoideae and Sauvagesioideae as monophyletic taxa. Furthermore, the inclusion of Lophira in the Ochnaceae (subfam. Ochnoideae) is confirmed. The genera Diegodendron and Strasburgeria do neither possess the synapomorphies for the Ochnaceae nor the synapomorphy for Ochnaceae, Quiinaceae and Scytopetalaceae (cristarque cells). For this reason these genera cannot be considered as closely related to the Ochnaceae. Indosinia and Adenanthe are reduced to synonymy in Sauvagesia and Tyleria respectively, making two new combinations necessary. A key for all genera of the Ochnaceae investigated is presented. All genera of the subfam. Sauvagesioideae and Lophira, Elvasia and Perissocarpa of the Ochnoideae are described. The possible evolution of characters as well as some hypotheses about pollination are investigated The biogeography of the family in connection with modes of dispersal is discussed.
S1x28x96c17c22c29	P. Bruyns;H. P. Linder	1991	A revision of Microloma R. Br. (Asclepiadaceae-Asclepiadeae)	Botanische Jahrbücher für Systematik, Pflanzengeschichte und Pflanzengeographie	112		453-527				The genus Microloma is revised. 10 species are recognised: M. poicilanthum, M. armatum, M. Iongitubum, M. hereroense, M. calycinum, M. sagittatum, M. incanum, M. penicillatum, M. tenuifolium, M. namaquense. The genus is divided into 4 sections two of which are described as new. Each species is illustrated in detail, material examined is cited and full synonymy given. A cladistic analysis is carried out.
S252	H. Loconte;D. W. Stevenson	1990	Cladistics of the Spermatophyta	Brittonia	42		197-211				A cladistic interpretation of seed plant phylogeny is presented that supports the traditional morphological hypothesis: (Cycadales-(Ginkgoales-(Coniferales-(Gnetales-Angiosperms)))). Gnetales and Angiosperms are supported as sister groups of the Anaspermae. A sister-group relationship between Coniferales and Ginkgoales represents a paraphyletic group, because Coniferales and Anaspermae share a common ancestry (Mesospermae). Ginkgoales and Mesospermae are sister groups of the Cladospermae. Cycadales are supported as the most archaic Spermatophyta. A posteriori consideration of fossil taxa supports the conclusion that data from the fossil record are useful for confirming plesiomorphies of extant taxa. Fossil taxa with apomorphic character states are discussed as biasing for superficial accelerated transformations, which are probably unacceptable from teh standpoint of morphological homology.
S11x5x95c11c25c52	J. A. Doyle;M. J. Donoghue	1992	Fossils and seed plant phylogeny reanalyzed	Brittonia	33		89-106				In a cladistic analysis of Recent seed plants, Loconte and Stevenson (1990) obtained results that conflict with our 1986 analysis of both extant and fossil groups and argued that fossil data had led us to incorrect conclusions. To explore this result and the general influence of fossils on phylogeny reconstruction, we assembled new Recent and Complete (extant plus fossil) data sets incorporating new data, advances in treatment of characters, and those changes of Loconte and Stevenson that we consider valid. Our Recent analysis yields only one most parsimonious tree, that of Loconte and Stevenson, in which conifers are linked with Gnetales and angiosperms (anthophytes), rather than with Ginkgo, as in our earlier Recent and Complete analyses. However, the shortest trees derived from our Complete analysis show five arrangements of extant groups, including that of Loconte and Stevenson and our previous arrangements, suggesting that the result obtained from extant taxa alone may be misleading. This increased ambiguity occurs because features that appear to unite extant conifers and anthophytes are seen as convergences when fossil taxa are interpolated between them. All trees found in the Complete analysis lead to inferences on character evolution that conflict with those that would be drawn from Recent taxa alone (e.g., origin of anthophytes from plants with a seed fern morphology). These results imply that conclusions on many aspects of seed plant phylogeny are premature, new evidence, which is most likely to come from the fossil record, is needed to resolve the uncertainties.
S5x6x97c12c21c16	D. M. Crayn;E. S. Fernando;P. A. Gadek;C. J. Quinn	1995	A reassessment of the familial affinity of the Mexican genus Recchia Mocino and Sesse ex DC	Brittonia	47	4	397-402	10.2307/2807568		Recchia; Simaroubaceae; Surianaceae; molecular systematics	Sequence data for the rbcL locus were obtained for two of the three species of the Mexican endemic, Recchia. Parsimony analyses of the molecular data base indicate that Surianaceae sensu Cronquist are paraphyletic; inclusion of Recchia rendered the family monophyletic. This placement is corroborated by a suite of morphological characters: an apocarpous (or monocarpic) gynoecium of bi-ovulate carpels with basal-marginal placentation and a ventrobasal style, and the occurrence in all but Guilfoylia of a characteristic 3-layered endocarp. The molecular data support a closer relationship between Recchia and the Australian Cadellia than between the latter and any of the other Australian genera. The molecular data suggest that the affinities of Surianaceae lie in a clade comprising at least Polygalaceae, Fabaceae and Quillaja.
S2190	P. B. Matheny;P. A. Moreau	2008	A rare and unusual lignicolous species of Inocybe (Agaricales) from eastern North America	Brittonia							Inocybe tubarioides is a rarely collected or recognized agaric with an unusual combination of ecological and morphological characters for this genus, namely a lignicolous habit and a strongly hygrophanous pileus. The species is known only from eastern North America and is reported here for the first time from states in New England and Canada. A taxonomic description is provided, including the first photographic record of the species and discussion of its evolutionary history. Based on molecular phylogenetic analysis the species is most closely related with significant measures of statistical support to two other narrowly endemic species of Inocybe: one also from eastern North America (I. tahquamenonensis) and another from northern Europe (I. relicina), the latter is the type of the genus Inocybe. These three species constitute the clade that corresponds with section Inocybe.
S2463	J. C. Villarreal;B. Goffinet;R. J. Duff;D. C. Cargill	2010	Phylogenetic delineation of Nothoceros and Megaceros (Dendrocerotaceae)	Bryologist	113	1	106-113	10.1639/0007-2745-113.1.106			Recent reconstruction of the phylogenetic relationships of hornworts has revealed novel hypotheses of unique common ancestries. The genus Megaceros, for example, was shown to be polyphyletic with New World species of the genus nested within Nothoceros. Here we present a sampling of most widely recognized species of both genera to provide a phylogenetic delimitation of Nothoceros and Megaceros based on the genes rbcL and nad5. Nothoceros (including the New World species of Megaceros) is monophyletic and restricted to the American continent (except the New Zealand N. giganteus) and the genus Megaceros is restricted to Asia and Australasia. The three widely accepted American species of Megaceros, M. aenigmaticus, M. fuegiensis and M. vincentianus are transferred here to Nothoceros. The lack of defining morphological characters for Nothoceros despite its morphological diversity highlights the need for further taxonomic, morphological and ultrastructural studies of the genus.
S7x11x97c17c01c48	F. A. Coyle	1995	A revision of the funnelweb mygalomorph spider subfamily Ischnothelinae (Araneae, Dipluridae)	Bulletin of the American Museum of Natural History	226		1-133		http://hdl.handle.net/2246/1665	Ischnothelinae; Spiders -- Tropics; Arachnida -- Tropics	The tropical diplurid spider subfamily Ischnothelinae is revised for the first time. The monophyly of this subfamily is supported by six putative synapomorphies: an elongate cymbial apophysis, two rows of cheliceral teeth, a procurved transverse fovea, collariform trichobothrial bases, fused silk spigots, and long, tapering, pseudosegmented terminal posterior lateral spinneret articles. Five genera are recognized: Ischnothele Ausserer (with 11 species in South America, Central America, and the Antilles), Andethele, new genus (with 3 species in the Andes Mountains of Peru), Lathrothele Benoit (with 4 species in Africa), Indothele, new genus (with 4 species in India and Sri Lanka), and Thelechoris Karsch (with 2 species in Africa and Madagascar). Phylogenies (based on cladistic analyses using two different sets of outgroups), biogeographic hypotheses, a key, diagnoses, descriptions, tables of quantitative character values, illustrations, analyses of variation, natural history information, locality records, and distribution maps are presented for the 24 recognized species. Thc cladistic analyses provide strong support for the monophyly of the Old World branch of the subfamily, the genera Andethele and Thelechoris, and the Greater Antillean and South American (goloboffi) clades of Ischnothele, and weaker or ambiguous support for the monophyly of Ischnothele, Lathrothele, and Indothele. Ten species are newly described: Ischnothele jeremie, 1. garcia, 1. huamblsa, and 1. golobofh; Andethele lucma, A. huanca, and A. tarma; Indothele lanka, 1. rothi, and 1. mala. Fourteen specific names are newly synonymized: Ischnothele ecuadorensis Schmidt with Ischnothele digitata (O. P.-Cambridge); Entomothele pusilla Simon, Thelechoris zebrina Simon, Thelechoris funesta Fischel, Thelechoris obtusa Fischel, and Ischnothele sexpunctata Bucherl, da Costa, and Lucas with Ischnothele caudata Ausserer; Ischnothele siemensi F. O. P.-Cambridge with Ischnothele guianensis (Walckenaer); Ischnothele indigens Vellard, Ischnothele zorodes Mello-Leitão, Ischnothele campestris Schiapelli and Gerschman, Ischnothele affinis Schiapelli and Gerschman, and Ischnothele cranwelli Gerschman and Schiapelli with Ischnothele annulata Tullgren; Lathrothele marmoratus Benoit with Lathrothele grabensis Benoit; and Thelechoris karschi Bosenberg and Lenz with Thelechoris striatipes (Simon). Several species previously placed in ischnotheline genera are not ischnothelines: Ischnothele annectens (Bertkau), Ischnothele simplicata Saito, Ischnothele strandi Spassky, Ischnothele lineata (Karsch), Ischnothele indicola Tikader, and Thelechoris australis Purcell. Evidence is presented that suggests that Ischnothele longicauda and Lathrothele grabensis may each consist of more than one species and that Thelechoris rutenbergi and T. striatipes may be conspecific.
S1958	T. Dikow	2008	Phylogeny of Asilidae inferred from morphological characters of imagines (Insecta: Diptera: Brachycera: Asiloidea)	Bulletin of the American Museum of Natural History							A phylogenetic hypothesis is proposed for higher-level relationships within Asilidae, based on a sample of 158 species from 140 genera representing all 11 previously recognized subfamily taxa and 39 of the 42 tribal taxa and 220 discrete, parsimony informative, morphological characters from all tagmata of the imagines. Cladistic analysis results in 720 most parsimonious trees of 2760 steps length, and a strict consensus topology of 2965 steps. The strict consensus cladogram is well resolved except for species of Apocleinae and Asilinae, which form a large polytomy. Monophyly of Asilidae is corroborated and supported by five autapomorphies: (1) labella of labium fused to prementum at least ventrally; (2) hypopharynx heavily sclerotized; (3) hypopharynx with dorsal seta-like spicules; (4) labrum short and at most half as long as labium; (5) cibarium trapezoidal. The clade Apioceridae + Mydidae is the adelphotaxon to Asilidae. The phylogenetic hypothesis indicates that five out of the eleven previously recognized subfamily taxa are non-monophyletic, i.e., Apocleinae, Asilinae, Dasypogoninae, Laphystiinae, and Stenopogoninae. The present cladistic analysis forms the most comprehensive phylogenetic study on Asilidae to date and is used to revise the taxon‚s phylogenetic classification in which 14 subfamily taxa are recognized. Ommatiinae, Trigonomiminae, and Stichopogoninae are recovered as monophyletic and contain the same genera as previously postulated. Dioctriinae and Leptogastrinae are also recovered as monophyletic, but the genera Myelaphus and Acronyches are transferred to them, respectively. Asilinae comprises all Apocleinae and Asilinae species and Laphriinae comprises all Laphriinae and Laphystiinae species sensu previous authors. Dasypogoninae and Stenopogoninae are divided into several taxa at phylogenetically unrelated positions in the cladogram. The Dasypogoninae only comprises Blepharepiini, Dasypogonini, Lastauracini, Megapodini (including Cyrtophryina, Lagodiina, Megapodina, and Senobasina), Molobratiini, Saropogonini, and Thereutriini as well as the unplaced genera Archilestris, Diogmites, and Lestomyia. The remaining taxa possessing either a large prothoracic tibial spine, i.e., Brachyrhopalini and Chrysopogonini, or a small S-shaped spur, i.e., Cophura, Leptarthrus, and Nicocles, are part of the Brachyrhopalinae (new status). The Stenopogoninae only comprises Enigmomorphini, Plesiommatini, and Stenopogonini as well as the unplaced genera Ancylorhynchus and Scylaticus. Bathypogoninae (new status), Phellinae (new status), Tillobromatinae (new status), and Willistonininae (new status) are new subfamilial taxa previously assigned to Stenopogoninae. The remaining Stenopogoninae sensu previous authors represented here, i.e., Cyrtopogonini, Ceraturgini, Heteropogon, Holopogon, Metapogon, and Rhabdogaster, are assigned to the Brachyrhopalinae (new status). The genera Coleomyia and Oligopogon remain incertae sedis as neither genus groups with any other Asilidae, and are positioned as adelphotaxa to speciose clades. The higher-level relationships are: (Laphriinae ((Asilinae + Ommatiinae) (Bathypogoninae (Phellinae ((Tillobromatinae (Coleomyia incertae sedis + Dasypogoninae + Stenopogoninae)) (Willistonininae (Oligopogon incertae sedis ((Dioctriinae (Leptogastrinae + Trigonomiminae)) (Brachyrhopalinae + Stichopogoninae))))))))).
S2164	R. S. Voss;S. A. Jansa	2008	Phylogenetic relationships and classification of didelphid marsupials, an extant radiation of New World metatherian mammals	Bulletin of the American Museum of Natural History							This report summarizes a decade of morphological and molecular research on the phylogenetic relationships of didelphid marsupials (opossums), a substantially intact radiation of New World metatherian mammals. We review the comparative morphology of Recent opossums, emphasizing those anatomical systems from which taxonomically useful information is available for the majority of living genera and species, namely the integument, cranium, and dentition. Morphological similarities and differences among didelphids and other plesiomorphic marsupials (caenolestids, microbiotheriids, dasyurids, and peramelids) are also described. These observations, representing evolved differences in diverse functional-morphological systems, together with karyotypic information gleaned from the literature, provide the basis for coding 129 phylogenetic characters that we scored for 44 ingroup and 7 outgroup taxa. Published information about the size, internal organization, chromosomal location, and physiological properties of five nuclear genes (BRCA1, DMP1, IRBP, RAG1, vWF) sequenced for this study suggest that these loci are unlinked, exist as single copies, are active in different tissues, and encode protein products with widely divergent functions. All of the sequenced fragments are long (>900 bp), free of alignment ambiguities, and translate to open reading frame. Nucleotide data from a total of 7320 aligned sites were obtained from 43 ingroup and 7 outgroup taxa. Separate parsimony, likelihood, and Bayesian analyses of these six data partitions (morphology + karyotypes, five genes) resulted in highly congruent estimates of didelphid phylogeny with few examples of conflict among strongly supported nodes. Analyses of concatenated sequences and combined (nonmolecular + sequence) datasets effectively summarize all of the common signal recovered from separate analyses: a completely resolved ingroup phylogeny with high support statistics at most nodes. Remaining problems (not conclusively resolved in this study) include the position of the ingroup root and the relationships of three genera (Chacodelphys, Cryptonanus, Tlacuatzin) within their respective suprageneric clades. The history of didelphid classification is reviewed, and all previous systems are found to contain nonmonophyletic groups. A revised phylogenetic classification consistent with our analytic results includes the following higher taxa: Glironiinae (for Glironia), Caluromyinae (Caluromys and Caluromysiops), Hyladelphinae (Hyladelphys), Didelphinae (Marmosini, Metachirini, Didelphini, and Thylamyini), Marmosini (Marmosa, Monodelphis, and Tlacuatzin), Metachirini (Metachirus), Didelphini (Chironectes, Didelphis, Lutreolina, and Philander), and Thylamyini (Chacodelphys, Cryptonanus, Gracilinanus, Lestodelphys, Marmosops, and Thylamys). The probable relationships of several Neogene fossil genera are also discussed. To facilitate identifications, all Recent genera are redescribed, representative crania are illustrated, and a key is provided.
S2x4x96c16c42c01	B. R. Baum	1983	A phylogenetic analysis of the tribe Triticeae (Poaceae) based on morphological characters of the genera	Canadian Journal of Botany	61		518-535				A phylogenetic analysis of Triticeae was performed by means of numerical methods. Five methods, each based on extreme assumptions of parameters so interpreted under Felsenstein's (1979) evolutionary model, were used: Camin-Sokal parsimony) Wagner parsimony, Dollo parsimony, polymorphism parsimony, and character-compatibility analysis. Although a considerable amount of parallelism was, for some time, suspected to have occurred in Triticeae (by Stebbins for instance) so that for this reason perhaps the assumptions of polymorphism parsimony might be most suitable for phylogenetic analysis, the five methods were used because the evolutionary assumptions for each investigated character are, and probably will long remain, unknown. Data input consisted of sets of hypothesized transformation series, each set subjected to analyses using the five methodsResults of an analysis provided the basis for altering the set of hypothesized transformation series for subsequent analysis. Analyses were carried out repeatedly until stabilization; that is until, in the author's judgment, the most parsimonious solution was arrived at and further trials were of diminishing return. The most parsimonious tree obtained served as a base for subsequent elaboration of the final tree, taking into consideration genetic information primarily, and for the erection of the proposed phylogenetic classification of Triticeae. A key is provided for identification of the groupings in the tribe. The proposed classification is discussed in the light of previous classifications, even though none of them were phylogenetic in the sense of Hennig.
S2x4x96c16c23c42	A. A. Anderberg	1989	Phylogeny and reclassification of the tribe Inuleae (Asteraceae)	Canadian Journal of Botany	67		2277-2296				The tribe Inuleae Cass. has been subject to a critical investigation. The many technical characters that are traditionally used in classification of the Inuleae are scrutinized, discussed, and analysed by means of a computerized parsimony program (PAUP). With one representative from each of the tribes Vernonieae, Liabeae, and Lactuceae as outgroups, three different analyses have been performed. Strict consensus trees for the three separate analyses are presented and discussed. A consensus tree based on the cladogram topologies obtained from all the three analyses is also presented. The taxonomic implication of the analyses is that the tribe Inuleae is an unnatural, not monophyletic group, which must be divided in better defined monophyletic tribes. Hence, three tribes are recognized and the majority of the described genera of the Inuleae are tentatively referred to one of these tribes . The tribes Gnaphalieae Rydb. (comprising the Inuleae—Gnaphaliinae and the Inuleae - Athrixiinae sensu Merxmuller et al.) and the Inuleae s.str., are accepted. Furthermore, the former subtribe Inuleae—Plucheinae Benth. is recognized and described as the new tribe Plucheae (Benth.) A. Anderb.
S11x4x95c20c46c15	R. J. Bayer	1990	A phylogenetic reconstruction of Antennaria (Asteraceae: Inuleae)	Canadian Journal of Botany	68		1389-1397				A cladistic analysis of 32 sexually reproducing species of Antennaria Gaertn. revealed that the genus comprises five constitutive monophyletic groups: Geyeriae, Argenteae, Dimorphae, Pulcherrimae, and Catipes. Three of the groups, Argenteae, Dimorphae, and Geyeriae, have retained relatively large numbers of plesiomorphic characters. The members of these three groups are mostly nonstoloniferous and have not evolved characters often associated with sexual dimorphism that occur in the remainder of Antennaria. Consequently these three groups closely resemble the suprageneric outgroup, Anaphalis and Gnaphalium. The Pulcherrimae and Catipes represent the most specialized groups. These two groups have wider distributions and occur in a much greater diversity of habitats than the Argenteae, Dimorphae, and Geyeriae. Evolutionary advancement in the genus has been toward dioecism and coincident sexual dimorphism, probably as a method to promote outcrossing. In addition, polyploidy and two asexual means of reproduction, agamospermy and horizontal stolons, have evolved in the more specialized groups, the Pulcherrimae and Catipes. Antennaria probably arose from Mexican Gnaphalium sometime during the Oligocene or Miocene, migrated into the western United States where it has evolved and migrated into other areas of the northern hemisphere and South America.
S2x3x96c17c20c39	S. H. Strauss;A. H. Doerksen;J. R. Byrne	1990	Evolutionary relationships of Douglas-fir and its relative (genus Pseudostuga) from DNA restriction fragment analysis	Canadian Journal of Botany	68		1502-1510				We used restriction fragment analysis of chloroplast, nuclear, and mitochondrial DNA to study phylogeny in the genus Pseudotsuga. Total genomic DNA from one outgroup (Larix occidentalis Nutt.) and five Pseudotsuga species from Japan mainland China, Taiwan, and North America were digested with 20 restriction enzymes, blotted, and probed up to 17 times with cloned DNA fragments. A total of 38 shared fragment characters were subjected to Wagner parsimony analysis coupled with bootstrapping to evaluate statistical significance of the phylogenetic trees. The complex patterns that we observed for actin gene fragments were evaluated via a Fitch-Margoliash distance-matrix analysis. Both parsimony and distance-matrix analyses indicated that relationships among species in the genus coincide with their current geographic distribution: genetic similarity declines with migration distance around the Pacific Rim. The Asian and North American species form well-differentiated and statistically significant monophyletic groups. Pseudotsuga japonica is the Asian species closest to the North American species. Affinities to the outgroup Larix occidentalis suggest that Pseudotsuga originated in North America and then migrated into Asia.
S233	K. W. Cullings;T. D. Bruns	1992	Phylogenetic origin of the Monotropoideae inferred from partial 28S ribsomal RNA gene sequences	Canadian Journal of Botany	70		1703-1708				Despite more than 100 years of detailed analysis of morphology and macromolecules, the phylogenetic origin of the Monotropoideae remains unclear. In this study partial sequences from the 28S rRNA gene were used to test two alternative hypotheses: (i) that the Monotropoideae share a most recent common ancestor with the Arbutoideae in the Ericaceae or (ii) that the Monotropoideae is the end result of a gradual transition from autotrophism to mycotrophic parasitism in the Pyrolaceae. Our results support the hypothesis that the Monotropoideae and the Arbutoideae are a monophyletic group and that the Monotropoideae should be included in the Ericaceae rather than the Pyrolaceae. The Monotropoid species Pleuricospora fimbriolata could not be placed within either the Monotropoideae or the Arbutoideae with any degree of confidence, leaving open the possibility that the Monotropoideae is polyphyletic.
S2x4x96c14c35c16	S. J. Darbyshire;S. I. Warwick	1992	Phylogeny of North American Festuca (Poaceae) and related genera using chloroplast DNA restriction site variation	Canadian Journal of Botany	70		2415-2429				Phylogenetic relationships in the genus Festuca, as expressed in recent classification systems, were tested using chloroplast DNA restriction endonuclease site variation data. Species native or introduced to North America were used as exemplars for taxa related to Festuca that have been recognized variously as genera; subgenera, and (or) sections. Cladistic analysis of 67 shared chloroplast DNA restriction site mutations indicated that Festuca and some related taxa, as circumscribed in morphologically based classifications, appear to be non-monophyletic. Cluster analysis of 108 polymorphic sites was largely congruent with the results of the cladistic analysis. Two main evolutionary lines were indicated. One contained the majority of the genus Festuca exemplars, including the subgenera Drymanthele, Subulatae, Subuliflorae, Obtusae, and Festuca, as well as Vulpia, Argillochloa, and subg. Leucopoa sect. Breviaristatae. The other lineage included subgenus Schedonorus, subg. Leucopoa sect. Leucopoa, and the genus Lolium. Analyses supported the recognition of two genera in each lineage: Vulpia and Festuca in one, and Leucopoa sensu stricto (including only sect. Leucopoa) and Lolium (including Festuca subg. Schedonorus) in the other. The recognition of the monotypic generic segregate Argillochloa (=F. dasyclada) was not supported by the analyses.
S3x30x98c09c56c42	D. S. Hibbett;M. J. Donoghue	1995	Progress toward a phylogenetic classification of the Polyporaceae through parsimony analysis of mitochondrial ribosomal DNA sequences	Canadian Journal of Botany	73	S1	S853-S861	10.1139/b95-331		Aphyllophorales; basidiomycetes; classification; phylogeny; Polyporaceae; ribosomal DNA	We used sequence data from mitochondrial small-subunit ribosomal DNA to infer phylogenetic relationships of the Polyporaceae. We examined 62 species representing 14 families of Aphyllophorales and Agaricales. Parsimony analyses of these sequences suggest that the Polyporaceae are polyphyletic. Higher order relationships are poorly resolved, but seven groups of specics are generally well supported (as measured by bootstrapping) or are congruent with previous taxonomic hypotheses. Group I includes Polyporus s.str., seven other genera of Polyporaceae, Lentinus, and Ganoderma. Because this clade contains the type species of Polyporus, it may serve as the core for a future recircumscription of the Polyporaceae. Group 2 is morphologically and ecologically diverse, but all members have amyloid, ornamented spores (with the possible exception of Heterobasidion). This group includes Bondarzewia, Heterobasidion, Hericium, Echinodontium, Lentinellus, Auriscalpium, and Russula. Group 3 includes five exemplars of the Hymenochaetaceae, as well as Oxyporus and Trichaptum. Trichaptum and members of the Hymenochaetaceae are unusual among the holobasidiomycetes in their possession of imperforate parenthosomes. Group 4 represents the Boletaceae and includes Boletus and Suillus. Group 5 includes Bjerkandera, which is a polypore, and Pulcherricium and Phanerochaete, which are corticioid. In Group 5 the corticioid habit may have been derived by reduction. Group 6 includes Fomitopsis, Piptoporus, and Daedalea, all of which are brown rot polypores with bipolar mating systems. Group 7 includes Laetiporus and Phaeolus. Laetiporus is classified in Polyporaceae, but Phaeolus has been placed in both the Polyporaceae and Hymenochaetaceae. In general, our results suggest that macromorphology is evolutionarily flexible, but that certain anatomical and physiological characters, while not free from homoplasy, contain clues to higher order relationships of polypores.
S3x31x98c12c48c42	F. Lutzoni;R. Vilgalys	1995	 Integration of morphological and molecular data sets in estimating fungal phylogenies	Canadian Journal of Botany	73	S1	S649-S659	10.1139/b95-307		data sets heterogeneity; homogeneity test; lichen phylogeny; Omphalina; ribosomal DNA	To provide a clearer picture of fungal species relationships, increased efforts are being made to include both molecular and morphological data sets in phylogenetic studies. This general practice in systematics has raised many unresolved questions and controversies regarding how to best integrate the phylogenetic information revealed by morphological and molecular characters. This is because phylogenetic trees derived using different data sets are rarely identical. Such discrepancies can be due to sampling error, to the use of an inappropriate evolutionary model for a given data set, or to different phylogenetic histories between the organisms and the molecule. Methods have been developed recently to test for heterogeneity among data sets, although none of these methods have been subjected to simulation studies. In this paper we compare three tests: a protocol described by Rodrigo et al., an adapted version of Faith's T-PTP test, and Kishino and Hasegawa's likelihood test. These tests were empirically compared using seven lichenized and nonlichenized Omphalina species and the related species Arrhenia lobata (Basidiomycota, Agaricales) for which nrDNA large subunit sequences and morphological data were gathered. The results of these three tests were inconsistent, Rodrigo's test being the only one suggesting that the two data sets could be combined. One of the three most parsimonious trees obtained from the combined data set with eight species is totally congruent with the relationships among the same eight species in an analysis restricted to the same portion of the nrDNA large subunit but extended to 26 species of Omphalina and related genera. Therefore, the results from phylogenetic analyses of this large molecular data set converged on one of the three most parsimonious topologies generated by the combined data set analysis. This topology was not recovered from either data set when analysed separately. This suggests that Rodrigo's homogeneity test might be better suited than the two other tests for determining if trees obtained from different data sets are sampling statistics of the same phylogenetic history.
S383	K. Põldmaa;E. Larsson;U. Kõljalg	1999	Phylogenetic relationships in Hypomyces and allied genera, with emphasis on species growing on wood-decaying homobasidiomycetes	Canadian Journal of Botany	77	12	1756–1768	10.1139/cjb-77-12-1756		fungicolous fungi, Hypocreales, ribosomal DNA, Sphaerostilbella, Sporophagomyces, systematics	In order to infer phylogenetic relationships among species of Hypomyces and allied genera, partial sequences of the 28S rDNA were obtained for 21 strains representing 19 species. On the basis of these data and 38 sequences obtained from GenBank, phylogenetic analyses were performed using the programs PAUP and Pee-Wee. Hypomyces appears to be paraphyletic, with species having wet-conidial phialidic anamorphs more closely related to other genera. Hypomyces chrysostomus is a sister group to the clade that includes species of Aphysiostroma, Arachnocrea and Hypocrea. Based on morphological and molecular evidence, a new genus, Sporophagomyces, is described for Hypomyces chrysostomus and two allied species. Hypomyces broomeanus forms one clade with species of Sphaerostilbella and is transferred to this genus. The recognition of Arachnocrea is justified. The integration of Cladobotryum species that are not known to undergo sexual reproduction with Hypomyces species that possess Cladobotryum anamorphs receives strong support but the whole complex of these species appears to be paraphyletic. Constraint trees, which require monophyly of all these ana- and pleomorphic species, appears significantly less likely than the other trees obtained under maximum likelihood or parsimony criteria. For the remaining species of Hypomyces, four distinct lineages are distinguished.
S624	J. C. Kang;R. W. Crous;K. M. Old;M. J. Dudzinski	2001	Non-conspecificity of Cylindrocladium quinqueseptatum and Calonectria quinqueseptata based on ß-tubulin gene phylogeny and morphology	Canadian Journal of Botany	79	10	1241–1247	10.1139/cjb-79-10-1241		Cylindrocladium reteaudii; Eucalyptus; Hypocreales; phylogeny; systematics	Cylindrocladium quinqueseptatum Boedijn & Reitsma was originally described from leaf spots of Hibiscus sabdariffa L. from Indonesia. This fungus infects many host plants in Southeast Asia and causes severe leaf blight disease of eucalypts. Calonectria quinqueseptata Figueiredo & Namek., which was described from leaf spots on Annona squamosa L. from Brazil, has been regarded as the teleomorph of Cy. quinqueseptatum. Based on morphology and on the phylogeny derived from the DNA sequence of a ß-tubulin gene portion spanning several phylogenetically informative introns, the two respective ex-type cultures are shown to be distinct species. Furthermore, Calonectria reteaudii (Bugn.) C. Booth (anamorph Cy. reteaudii (Bugn.) Boesew.), which was described on Smithia bequaertii De Wild. from Vietnam, is shown to be morphologically identical to a comprehensive selection of isolates of Cy. quinqueseptatum from Southeast Asia, Australia, and Madagascar. As Cy. reteaudii represents an older name for Cy. quinqueseptatum, we suggest that the fungus causing widespread damage on eucalypts and other hosts in the above regions be referred to as Cy. reteaudii. Calonectria quinqueseptata should be retained for the fungus that thus far has been found only in Brazil.
S670	S. Ekman;P. M. Jørgensen	2002	Towards a molecular phylogeny for the lichen family Pannariaceae (Lecanorales, Ascomycota)	Canadian Journal of Botany	80	6	625-634	10.1139/b02-043		lichens; Pannariaceae; ITS; ribosomal DNA; phylogeny; MCMC	The phylogeny of the family Pannariaceae (Lecanorales, lichenized Ascomycota) was investigated using ITS1–5.8S–ITS2 nuclear ribosomal DNA sequences representing 21 species. Phylogenetic estimations were performed using parsimony and a Bayesian Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) tree sampling procedure. Several phylogenetic null hypotheses were tested, also using MCMC. The results indicate that Pannariaceae, as currently treated, is polyphyletic and that Degelia sect. Amphiloma, Fuscopannaria subg. Micropannaria, and Moelleropsis s.str. do not belong in the family. The inclusion of Parmeliella in the Pannariaceae could not be rejected, although it falls outside the family in the optimal trees. Psoroma, Santessoniella, Protopannaria, Fuscopannaria subg. Fuscopannaria, Moelleropsis s.str., and Pannaria unequivocally belong to the family. The Pannaria sphinctrina group belongs in Pannaria despite its green-algal photobiont. Protopannaria pezizoides is not, as sometimes treated, a Pannaria, although a relationship with Psoroma could not be ruled out. In the optimal trees, Moelleropsis s.str. is nested inside Fuscopannaria subg. Fuscopannaria and Santessoniella inside Psoroma, but null hypotheses of their independence from these genera could not be rejected. Pannaria cannot be divided into two monophyletic subgenera, Pannaria and Chryopannaria. The photobiont has changed twice or three times and the ascus apex and hymenial amyloidity twice within the Pannariaceae.
S958	M. Goeker;H. Voglmayr;A. Riethmueller;M. Weiss;F. Oberwinkler	2003	Taxonomic aspects of Peronosporaceae inferred from Bayesian molecular phylogenetics	Canadian Journal of Botany	81		672-683				We present the results of a Bayesian phylogenetic analysis of parts of the nuclear 28S rDNA gene of a representative sample of the Peronosporales. Peronospora s. l. is shown to be paraphyletic. Based on molecular and morphological evidence, several species of the genus Peronospora are transferred to Hyaloperonospora. Plasmopara oplismeni appears to be related only distantly to the other Plasmopara species, and is transferred to the new genus Viennotia based on molecular, morphological, and ecological evidence. The remaining Plasmopara species are likely to be paraphyletic with respect to Bremia, Paraperonospora, and Basidiophora. Phytophthora is shown to be paraphyletic with respect to the obligatory biotrophic genera. Evidence for the assumption that obligatory biotrophism arose independently at least twice in Peronosporales is demonstrated.
S916	B. Koster;J. Scott;B. Wong;D. Malloch;N. Straus	2003	A geographically diverse set of isolates indicates two phylogenetic lineages within Stachybotrys chartarum	Canadian Journal of Botany	81		633-643	10.1139/B03-056			Stachybotrys chartarum is a black mitosporic fungus capable of dense colonization of cellulose-based building materials such as drywall. The presence of S. chartarum in indoor environments has been reported as linked to a variety of alleged environment-related illnesses including infant acute idiopathic pulmonary hemorrhage (AIPH) although there continues to be a lack of direct evidence in support of this association. We investigated genetic variation among fifty-two morphologically and geographically diverse, indoor and outdoor isolates of S. chartarum senu lato using molecular markers based on &#946;-tublulin, calmodulin, elongation factor 1-alpha and trichodiene synthase genes as well as the ITS region of nuclear ribosomal DNA. Gene genealogies proved concordant in dividing all isolates into two strongly supported clades. The majority of the variable sites separating these lineages were fixed within each of these clades and there was no evidence of recombination between genotypes. The results of this study therefore provide strong support for the recognition of two phylogenetic species within S. chartarum ss. lat. and further demonstrate the limitations of morphological characters in delineating monophyletic taxa among morphologically simple fungi.
S731	W. Maier;D. Begerow;M. Weifl;F. Oberwinkler	2003	Phylogeny of the rust fungi: an approach using nuclear large subunit ribosomal DNA sequences	Canadian Journal of Botany	81	1	12-23	10.1139/b02-113			Sequence data from nuclear large subunit ribosomal DNA was used to infer phylogenetic relationships of selected genera of the Uredinales. We investigated 52 rust fungi representing 9 families and three outgroup species. Neighbor joining analysis and a Bayesian method of phylogenetic inference using Monte Carlo Markov chains confirm (1) the rust fungi as natural group and indicate that (2) Puccinia, Uromyces, Endophyllum, and Cumminsiella have a common origin. (3) The autoecious Rosaceae-rusts Phragmidium, Kuehneola, Triphragmium, and Trachyspora are a monophyletic group. (4) The gasteroid genus Ochropsora is closely related to Tranzschelia. (5) The Pucciniastreae sensu Dietel (1938) are recognized as a monophyletic group in neighbor joining analysis, while (6) the Pucciniaceae s.l. (Dietel 1928) are supported by Bayesian analysis. (7) The following genera appear to be monophyletic: Chrysomyxa, Coleosporium, Cronartium, Gymnosporangium, Melampsora, Phragmidium, and Tranzschelia, whereas (8) the genera Puccinia, Pucciniastrum, Thekopsora and Uromyces are not.
S977	M. Stoll;M. Piepenbring;D. Begerow;F. Oberwinkler	2003	Molecular phylogeny of Ustilago and Sporisorium species (Basidiomycota, Ustilaginales) based on internal transcribed spacer (ITS) sequences	Canadian Journal of Botany	81		976-984				DNA sequence data from the internal transcribed spacer (ITS) region of the nuclear rDNA genes were used to determine a phylogenetic relationship between the graminicolous smut genera Ustilago and Sporisorium (Ustilaginales). Fifty-three members of both genera were analysed together with three related outgroup genera. Neighbor-joining and Bayesian inferences of phylogeny indicate the monophyly of a bipartite genus Sporisorium and the monophyly of a core Ustilago clade. Both methods confirm the recently published nomenclatural change of the cane smut Ustilago scitaminea to Sporisorium scitamineum and indicate a putative connection between Ustilago maydis and Sporisorium . Overall, the three clades resolved in our analyses are only weakly supported by morphological characters. Still, their preferences to parasitize certain subfamilies of Poaceae could be used to corroborate our results: all members of both Sporisorium groups occur exclusively on the grass subfamily Panicoideae. The core Ustilago group mainly infects the subfamilies Pooideae or Chloridoideae.
S1146	H. Myburg;M. Gryzenhout;B. D. Wingfield;M. G. Milgroom;S. Kaneko;M. J. Wingfield	2004	DNA sequence data and morphology define Cryphonectria species in Europe, China and Japan	Canadian Journal of Botany							Cryphonectria includes important tree pathogens as well as species believed to be saprophytes. Recent phylogenetic studies have concentrated on North American and southern hemisphere Cryphonectria spp., but little is known about Asian and European taxa. In this study we identify and differentiate between the species occurring in Europe, China and Japan using morphological and phylogenetic comparisons between the Cryphonectria species. Phylogenetic comparisons were based on sequence data from the ribosomal ITS operon and two regions in the b-tubulin gene. Unknown Japanese and Chinese isolates showing different cultural features to those of C. parasitica from Japan and the USA, grouped with isolates of C. nitschkei from Quercus spp. and Rhus javanica. Isolates of C. havanensis from Q. grosseserrata, Castanopsis cuspidata, Pyrus sinensis and Eucalyptus globulus also grouped in this phylogenetic clade. We propose that Cryphonectria nitschkei and the fungus that has been referred to as C. havanensis in Japan should be treated as a single taxon. Phylogenetic and morphological data also suggest that there are two species currently representing C. radicalis in Europe. One of these species is similar to the type specimen of C. radicalis, while the other species probably is new.
S1274	S. I. Warwick;C. A. Sauder	2005	Phylogeny of tribe Brassiceae (Brassicaceae) based on chloroplast restriction site polymorphisms and nuclear ribosomal internal transcribed spacer (ITS) and chloroplast trnL intron sequences	Canadian Journal of Botany							Using sequence data from the ITS region (internal transcribed spacers ITS-1 and ITS-2 of nuclear DNA and the 5.8 rRNA gene), chloroplast DNA (cpDNA) sequence data from the trnL intron and cpDNA restriction site polymorphism data, we examined the evolutionary relationships of the tribe Brassiceae (Brassicaceae). A group of approximately 50 genera, it is distinguished by the presence of conduplicate cotyledons and/or heteroarthrocarpic fruit. cpDNA restriction site data and ITS, trnL, and combined ITS/trnL sequence data were obtained for 22, 104, 94, and 87 taxa in the tribe, respectively. Results from maximum parsimony analyses of the cpDNA and ITS and ITS/trnL sequence data showed a monophyletic origin for the tribe, with the inclusion of controversial members Calepina, Conringia and Orychophragmus. ITS- and ITS/trnL-based clades corresponded to taxonomic subtribes: Vellinae, Zillinae, and Savignyinae; but as with previous cpDNA studies, there was little support for subtribes Brassicinae, Raphaninae and Moricandiinae. Although there was no support for the Rapa/Oleracea or Nigra cpDNA lineages, many cpDNA subclades within each of them were evident in the ITS- and ITS/trnL-based phylogeny. The trnL sequence data provided little or no resolution of tribal or subtribal limits. The ITS-based data indicated polyphyletic origins for Brassica, Diplotaxis and Erucastrum.
S1563	B. A. Ford;R. F. C. Naczi;H. Ghazvini;M. Iranpour	2006	AFLP analysis reveals three distinct taxa in Carex digitalis sect. Careyanae (Cyperaceae)	Canadian Journal of Botany							Unweighted pair-group (UPGMA) cluster, neighbor-joining (NJ) and parsimony analyses using amplified fragment length polymorphism (AFLP) data revealed the presence of three taxa within Carex digitalis (var. digitalis, var. floridana, var. macropoda). Even when taxa occur syntopically, genetic distinctiveness is maintained (Hertford Co., NC populations of var. macropoda and var. floridana). Clades/clusters corresponding to vars. digitalis and floridana were well supported in all analyses. However, the var. macropoda clade was poorly supported on most trees. Despite our inability to fully resolve taxon relationships, AFLP data substantiate ongoing morphological and phytogeographic studies that show the presence of additional species diversity within sect. Careyanae and the eastern North American Carex flora.
S1616	W. A. Untereiner;F. A. Naveau;J. Bachewich;A. Angus	2006	Evolutionary relationships of Hyphodiscus hymeniophilus (anamorph Catenulifera rhodogena) inferred from b-tubulin and nuclear ribosomal DNA sequences	Canadian Journal of Botany	84	2	243-253	10.1139/b05-165			During an investigation of lignicolous ascomycetes from Luxembourg, we isolated a Phialophora-like species that produced striking red colonies. To confirm the identity of this fungus as Catenulifera rhodogena, we compared it to isolates of Cat. rhodogena and Hyphodiscus hymeniophilus on a variety of media. Portions of the b-tubulin gene and the nuclear ribosomal DNA cistron (ITS and LSU) were sequenced to examine the relationship of isolates of Cat. rhodogena and H. hymeniophilus from different substrates and to test the hypothesis that Cadophora and Catenulifera are congeneric. The phylogenetic position of Catenulifera within the Ascomycota was investigated based on the analysis of the SSU rDNA sequences. The isolates examined were indistinguishable micromorphologically and closely related phylogenetically. Three strains of Cat. rhodogena from bark or wood and one stain from Piptoporus betulinus formed a strongly supported clade in analyses of b-tubulin and ITS sequences. This clade did not encompass the ex-type isolates of Cistella rubescens and Scopulariopsis rhodogena or a second isolate of Cat. rhodogena from P. betulinus. Analysis of partial LSU sequences confirmed the close phylogenetic relationship of Cat. rhodogena and H. hymeniophilus but provided no evidence that the isolates could be grouped by substrate or that Catenulifera is synonymous with Cadophora. The position of Catenulifera within the Helotiales was not resolved based on the comparison of LSU and SSU sequences, but the isolate for which we obtained complete SSU sequence grouped with the root endophyte Phialocephala fortinii. Comparison of ITS sequences confirmed the close phylogenetic relationship of Hyphodiscus to members of the Dermateaceae and Hyaloscyphaceae.
S1429	S. I. Warwick;I. A. Al-Shehbaz;C. A. Sauder	2006	Phylogenetic position of Arabis arenicola and generic limits of Eutrema and Aphragmus (Brassicaceae) based on sequences of nuclear ribosomal DNA	Canadian Journal of Botany							Sequence data from the nuclear ITS region of 45 taxa were used to determine the phylogenetic relationship of Arabis arenicola to Arabis, Arabidopsis, Braya, and Eutrema and that of Eutrema to purported related genera Aphragmus, Lignariella, Neomartinella, Platycraspedum, Taphrospermum, and Thellungiella. Arabis arenicola was originally described as Eutrema in 1830, transferred to Arabis in 1898 and has remained in Arabis to the present, even though it is morphologically more similar to Arabidopsis, Braya and Eutrema. Sequence data were obtained from representative taxa of Arabis, Arabidopsis and related Boechera and Catolobus, Braya and Neotorularia, and Eutrema, Aphragmus, Lignariella, Neomartinella, Platycraspedum, Taphrospermum, and Thellungiella. The five Arabis arenicola accessions examined had identical ITS sequences to each other and to four Arabidopsis lyrata accessions. In both maximum parsimony and maximum likelihood analyses Arabis arenicola fell within the Arabidopsis clade and was closely aligned with Arabidopsis lyrata. Two of six purported related genera were not closely related to Eutrema. Both analyses placed Lignariella within a separate well-supported clade with Aphragmus, while the other four genera Neomartinella, Platycraspedum, Taphrospermum, and Thellungiella fell within a well-supported clade with Eutrema. Morphology and molecular data strongly suggest transferring Arabis arenicola to Arabidopsis, expanding Aphragmus to include Lignariella, and expanding Eutrema to include Neomartinella, Platycraspedum, Taphrospermum, and Thellungiella. New combinations in Arabidopsis and Aphragmus are proposed.
S1839	A. T. E. Koziak;K. C. Cheng;R. G. Thorn	2007	Phylogenetic analyses of Nematoctonus and Hohenbuehelia (Pleurotaceae)	Canadian Journal of Botany	85						Hohenbuehelia (Agaricales, Pleurotaceae) and Nematoctonus (Hyphomycetes) are the names for the sexual and asexual stages of a genus of nematode-destroying fungi (Basidiomycota). We obtained partial sequences of nuclear ribosomal DNA, including the internal transcribed spacer region and the 5' end of the large subunit, of 37 isolates of Hohenbuehelia and Nematoctonus representing 13 of the 16 described species in Nematoctonus. Phylogenetic analyses support HohenbueheliaˆNematoctonus as a monophyletic clade of the Pleurotaceae, within which the species were placed in five main subclades. Exclusively predatory species (Nematoctonus brevisporus Thorn & G.L. Barron, Nematoctonus campylosporus Drechsler, Nematoctonus robustus F.R. Jones, and Nematoctonus sp. UAMH 5317) appear to be basal. In these species, adhesive knobs to capture prey are produced on their hyphae, but not on their conidia. A single mycelial individual may feed on many nematodes. From these have arisen both exclusively parasitoid species (Nematoctonus cylindrosporus Thorn & G.L. Barron, Nematoctonus leiosporus Drechsler, Nematoctonus leptosporus Drechsler, Nematoctonus pachysporus Drechsler, and Nematoctonus tylosporus Drechsler) and species that we call intermediate predators (Nematoctonus angustatus Thorn & G.L. Barron, Nematoctonus concurrens Drechsler, Nematoctonus geogenius Thorn & G.L. Barron, Nematoctonus hamatus Thorn & G.L. Barron, and Nematoctonus subreniformis Thorn & G.L. Barron). Exclusively parasitoid species have conidia that germinate to form sticky knobs that attach to passing nematodes, but lack adhesive knobs on the hyphae. Each mycelial individual feeds on only one nematode. Intermediate predators have adhesive knobs both on hyphae and on germinated conidia and can act in both predatory and parasitoid modes. Most morphospecies are resolved as monophyletic, but sequences of additional gene regions are required to clarify species limits within the N. angustatus ˆ N. geogenius group.
S1602	P. B. Matheny;J. A. Gossman;P. Zalar;T. K. A. Kumar;D. S. Hibbett	2007	Resolving the phylogenetic position of the Wallemiomycetes: an enigmatic major lineage of Basidiomycota	Canadian Journal of Botany							The Wallemiomycetes includes three species of molds from the genus Wallemia. These fungi are adapted to environments of high osmotic stress, contaminate various foods, cause respiratory disease, and have an unusual mode of asexual reproduction. Wallemia was recently proposed as a new class based on 18S ribosomal RNA gene sequences to accommodate the isolated position of the clade in the Basidiomycota. We analyzed the phylogenetic position of the Wallemiomycetes using 3451 nucleotide characters of the 18S, 25S, and 5.8S ribosomal RNA genes and 1282 amino acid positions of rpb1, rpb2, and tef1 nuclear protein-coding genes across 91 taxa. Different gene regions and methods of phylogenetic inference (parsimony versus Bayesian) produce mildly conflicting placements of the Wallemiomycetes. Parsimony analyses of nrDNA data suggest the Wallemiomycetes is an early diverging lineage of Basidiomycota, occupying a basal position near the Entorrhizomycetidae. Ultrastructural data, some Bayesian analyses, and amino acid sequences suggest the Wallemiomycetes may be the sister group of the Agaricomycotina or Ustilaginomycotina. The combined gene tree supports the Wallemiomycetes as a lineage basal to a core clade of Pucciniomycotina, Ustilaginomycotina, and Agaricomycotina with robust measures of branch support. This study reinforces the isolated position of Wallemia in the Basidiomycota using molecular data from six nuclear genes. In total, five major lineages of Basidiomycota are recognized: the Agaricomycotina, Ustilaginomycotina, Pucciniomycotina, Entorrhizomycetidae, and the Wallemiomycetes.
S1719	K. K. Nakasone	2007	Morphological and molecular studies on Resinicium sensu stricto	Canadian Journal of Botany							Resinicium Parmasto is typified by Resinicium bicolor (Hymenochaetales, Basidiomycota), a readily recognized and widely distributed corticioid, lignicolous species in the northern hemisphere. Five new species of Resinicium closely allied to R. bicolor from the Caribbean region are described and illustrated: R. confertum, R. monticola, R. mutabile, R. rimulosum, and R. tenue. In addition, Resinicium bicolor and R. friabile are redescribed and illustrated. Sequence analyses of the internal transcribed spacer region support the recognition of the new taxa. Furthermore, nuclear small subunit ribosomal RNA sequence data support the recognition of two groups of Resinicium species: the Resinicium sensu stricto group, including R. bicolor, and the Resinicium sensu lato group that includes R. furfuraceum. The genus Resinicium is redefined and a key to the Resinicium sensu stricto species is provided.
S1929	S. Stefanovic;M. Costea	2007	Reticulate evolution in the parasitic genus Cuscuta (Convolvulaceae): over and over and over again	Canadian Journal of Botany							The frequency and relative importance of hybridization in plants has been an area of intense debate. Although this evolutionary mechanism has received considerable attention from plant biologists, there are no well-supported cases of reticulate evolution involving parasitic plants to date. Recent molecular phylogenetic analyses revealed that the subgenus Grammica, the largest and most diverse group of the stem parasitic genus Cuscuta (dodders), consists of 15 major clades. We describe here five cases of strongly supported discordance between phylogenies derived from plastid and nuclear data and interpret them as results of five independent hybridization events. Three of these cases could represent relatively recent reticulations because each of them involves more closely related species, always confined within the same major clade as their putative parental species, and are sympatric/parapartric in distribution with them. The two remaining cases involve species whose potential progenitors are derived from different major groups of Grammica and are allopatric in their present distribution. A series of statistical tests was conducted to assess and further explore the significance of these phylogenetic incongruences. Alternative explanations for discordant gene topologies are explored. Cuscuta liliputana, a new Mexican species of hybrid origin is described.
S1981	M. Costea;F. Aiston;S. Stefanovic	2008	Species delimitation, phylogenetic relationships and two new species in the Cuscuta gracillima complex (Convolvulaceae)	Canadian Journal of Botany							Basic morphology, scanning electron microscopy, and DNA sequence data from the plastid trnLˆF region and the nuclear internal transcriber (ITS) spacer regions were used to delimit the species of a recently circumscribed clade of Cuscuta˜the C. gracillima complex from Mexico, Central and northern South Americaˆˆand to investigate their phylogenetic relationships. The group is characterized by inflorescences that appear to emerge directly from the hosts‚ stems. Eight lineages were recognized, with two of them proposed here as new species: C. punana from Ecuador and C. vandevenderi from Mexico. Cuscuta colombiana is redefined to include C. aristeguietae, and C. deltoidea is broadened to encompass C. serruloba. A taxonomic treatment with an identification key, descriptions, and illustrations is provided; the biogeography and conservation status of the eight species are also discussed.
S2187	B. M. Pryor;R. Creamer;R. A. Shoemaker;J. McLain-Romero;S. Hambleton	2008	Undifilum, a new genus for endophytic Embellisia oxytropis and parasitic Helminthosporium bornmuelleri on legumes	Canadian Journal of Botany							Fungal endophytes of Oxytropis kansuensis from China, previously described as Embellisia oxytropis, and endophytes of locoweed (Oxytropis and Astragalus spp.) from the United States are reported here as members of a new genus in the Pleosporaceae, Undifilum, based on morphological and molecular analyses. Morphological comparisons among recovered isolates revealed characters that are somewhat similar to those of the genus Embellisia including conidia ovate to obclavate to long ellipsoid, straight or slightly to decidedly inequilateral, with occasionally one or two cells distinctly swollen. Moreover, transepta are occasionally thickened, dark, and rigid in comparison to the exterior conidium wall. However, parsimony analysis of sequences from ITS1/5.8S/ITS2, glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase gene, and mitochondrial small subunit rDNA datasets revealed that the Oxytropis/Astragalus endophytes formed a clade distinct from existing Stemphylium, Alternaria, Nimbya, Ulocladium, and other Embellisia species. A second taxon, Helminthosporium bornmuelleri, was reexamined and found to posses similar morphological features to those of the Oxytropis/Astragalus isolates. Sequence analysis placed this taxon in the same clade with high bootstrap support. The distinct morphology and genetics of these taxa, combined with the endophytic habit and production of the alkaloid swainsonine of isolates recovered from locoweed, demonstrates that these fungi, all recovered from legumes, represent a new genus, herein described as Undifilum. The two species now placed in this genus are redescribed as U. oxytropis and U. bornmuelleri.
S1196	M. Laurin;R. R. Reisz	1999	A new study of Solenodonsaurus janenschi, and a reconsideration of amniote origins and stegocephalian evolution	Canadian Journal of Earth Sciences	36	8	1239-1255	10.1139/cjes-36-8-1239			A restudy of the holotype and other known specimens of Solenodonsaurus, a Late Carboniferous relative of amniotes, suggests that this taxon did not have a tympanum. Its teeth lack labyrinthine infolding, and the frontal did not reach the orbit. A new phylogenetic analysis of stegocephalians suggests that Solenodonsaurus is an anthracosaur, and that it is the sister group of Cotylosauria. It also shows that the problematic taxon Westlothiana may not be an anthracosaur (not a stem-amniote). A recent suggestion that diadectomorph cotylosaurs laid amniotic eggs is shown to be based on tenuous evidence, although this remains a possibility. The evolution of the otic region is studied using parsimony to determine whether the emargination present in Solenodonsaurus and in some diadectomorphs is a primitive or a secondary character, but this procedure yields equivocal results.
S403	D. Wipf;A. Fribourg;J. C. Munch;B. Botton;F. Buscot	1999	Diversity of the internal transcribed spacer of rDNA in morels	Canadian Journal of Microbiology	45	9	769–778	10.1139/CJM-45-9-769		Morchellaceae; Discinaceae; ITS	The internal transcribed spacer (ITS) of rDNA was analysed by PCR/RFLP in 66 strains belonging to 11 putative species of the Morchellaceae and 3 species of the Discinaceae. For certain Taxa, in particular Morchella esculenta, M. conica, M. elata, isolates from distant geographical origin were available. Nevertheless, no intraspecific variations of ITS length and restriction was noted. All genera were separated and within Morchella, four putative species could be clearly distinguished in the group of the yellow morels (sectio adnatae). In contrast, no distinction could be obtained between the compared taxa in the group of the black morels (sectio distantes). Sequence analyses of the ITS were performed in one strain of seven putative Morchella. The sequence comparison confirmed the distinctions within the yellow morels and allowed us to separate one putative taxon from the others in black morels. Only the 5,8 gene could be aligned in all sequenced samples. The ITS1 and ITS2 sectors could only be aligned within the black and yellow morels, respectively. The genetic and phylogenetic distances between black and yellow morels respectively revealed by maximum parsimony and neighbour joining analyses both confirmed the great distance between these species groups and address the question of a separation in the genus Morchella.
S701	E. A. Remigio;D. A. W. Lepitzki;J. S. Lee;P. D. N. Hebert	2001	Molecular systematic relationships and evidence for a recent origin of the thermal spring endemic snails Physella johnsoni and Physella wrighti (Pulmonata: Physidae)	Canadian Journal of Zoology	79	11	1941-1950	10.1139/cjz-79-11-1941			The evolutionary origins of Physella johnsoni and Physella wrighti, freshwater snails endemic to thermal springs in Alberta and British Columbia, were examined by sequence comparisons of mitochondrial genes coding for segments of the large subunit ribosomal RNA (16S) and cytochrome c oxidase I (COI) with those in the closely allied species Physella gyrina. Phylogenetic reconstructions based on combined and separate analyses of the datasets identified P. wrighti as the sister taxon to a P. johnsoni + P. gyrina clade. For both gene regions there was little or no sequence variation among conspecific individuals, but a number of diagnostic differences existed between each of the species pairs. Tree topologies and estimates of sequence divergence indicate that the divergence events which separated the three species occurred rather recently and at relatively brief intervals, and it is likely that P. wrighti is the source of the ancestral population from which P. johnsoni and P. gyrina were derived. Our findings support the recognition of P. johnsoni and P. wrighti as endemic species. The populations of P. johnsoni probably separated from P. gyrina about 10 000 years ago, when glaciers retreated from the Banff area and prehistoric lake levels dropped. The limited molecular divergence between P. johnsoni and P. gyrina argues against their current placement in different subgenera within the genus Physella.
S1381	A. Choudhury;V. León-Règagnon	2005	Molecular phylogenetics and biogeography of Bunodera spp. (Trematoda: Allocreadiidae), parasites of percid and gasterosteid fishes	Canadian Journal of Zoology							The genus Bunodera (Trematoda: Allocreadiidae) is represented by 5 freshwater species that include the widely distributed, holarctic, B. luciopercae in mainly perch and related percids, the endemic North American species B. sacculata in percids, B. eucaliae and B. inconstans in freshwater sticklebacks, and the trans-Pacific B. mediovitellata in sticklebacks. Their varied biogeography and host-associations provide a potential model system to investigate endemicity, speciation modes and coevolutionary phenomena. Partial sequences of selected regions of the 28s ribosomal RNA gene in combination with morphological data were used to build a hypothesis of relationships of Bunodera spp., which in turn is used as a basis for discussing the co-evolutionary and speciation history in this parasite group. Results from the combined data yielded a tree (C.I. = 0.82) identical in topology to that obtained from the molecular data alone, which supported the following resolution: ((((B. luciopercae (((B. sacculata ((B. mediovitellata (B. eucaliae + B. inconstans)))). The basal position of B. luciopercae is consistent with its holarctic distribution and a basal percid as its main host. The more basal positions of two typical perch parasites and the association of a more derived clade (B. mediovitellata + B. eucaliae + B. inconstans) with sticklebacks indicates host-shifting from percids to sticklebacks. In addition, the sister relationships and North American endemicity of the two most derived species, B. euclaiae and B. inconstans is also consistent with the more derived position of their host, the freshwater brook stickleback, and with the speciation and diversification of gasterosteids in Nearctic freshwaters.
S2x5x96c17c49c16	P. R. Crane	1985	Phylogenetic relationships in seed plants	Cladistics	1		329-348				The phylogenetic relationships of nineteen extant and fossil seed plants are considered. Analysis of 31 characters produced ten topologically similar and equally parsimonious cladograms. A strict consensus tree derived from these cladograms places Lyginopteris as the sister taxon to the other seed plants included. Within this clade all the taxa considered, except medullosans and cycads, form a single monophyletic group defined by the presence of flattened seeds and saccate pollen (platysperms). Relationships between medullosans, cycads, and platysperms were not resolved, but within the platysperm clade conifers and cordaites (Cordaixylon, Mesoxylon) + Ginkgo form a monophyletic group (coniferophytes). The higher platysperms (glossopterids, Caytonia, corystosperms, Bennettitales, Pentoxylon, Gnetales, and angiosperms) are also monophyletic, but their relationship to coniferophytes, peltasperms, and Callistophyton is unresolved. Pentoxylon is placed as sister taxon to the Bennettitales, and together they form the sister group to a clade in which Gnetales and angiosperm are sister taxa. The Bennettitales + Pentoxylon + Gnetales + angiosperms (anthophytes) form a monophyletic sister group to the corystosperms. This analysis is compared with current classifications of seed plants. It does not support a close relationship between Bennettitales and cycads, it provides no evidence for seed plant polyphyly, and it strongly suggests that the current concept of seed ferns has little value in a phylogenetic context.
S2x5x96c18c06c58	R. Dahlgren;K. Bremer	1985	Major clades of the angiosperms	Cladistics	1		349-368				Our knowledge of fundamental angiosperm interrelationships is still very incomplete. The absence of a narrowly circumscribed gymnosperm outgroup, ideally the sister group, makes character evaluation, necessary for a cladistic analysis, difficult. According to current views the superorder Magnoliiflorae with a number of other groups, for example the monocotyledons, may represent a complex of families near the base of the angiosperms. Interrelationships of groups within the monocotyledons are much better understood than those between groups within the dicotyledons. A cladogram of monocotyledon orders based on earlier work by R. Dahlgren, H. T. Clifford, and F. N. Rasmussen is presented. A data matrix for a sample of the angiosperms with 61 characters for 49 taxa, mostly magnoliifloran and related families, is presented. The characters are polarized mainly according to the current view that the primitive angiosperm morphotype is a woody dicotyledon with strobiloid flowers. As an alternative the matrix is adjusted following W. C. Burger's conjecture that the primitive angiosperm was a herbaceous monocotyledon with trimerous flowers. Both matrices were run in a computerized parsimony analysis, resulting in numerous equally parsimonious solutions. This result is illustrative of the great homoplasy in the available character information, and also of how little actually is known about fundamental angiosperm interrelationships or phylogeny.
S250	D. L. Lipscomb	1985	The eukaryotic kingdoms	Cladistics	1		127-140				Cladistic analysis of data from ultrastructural and other cell biological studies indicates that neither the classical two kingdom nor the commonly accepted five kingdom classifications accurately represent the cellular diversity of eukaryotes. The resulting cladogram indicates instead that there are nine major groups of eukaryotes.
S2x4x96c16c31c01	A. Anderberg	1986	The genus Pegolettia (Compositae, Inuleae)	Cladistics	2		158-186				The genus Pegolettia (Compositae, Inuleae) from Africa, Arabia, and the Middle East is revised. The nine recognized species, viz. P. lanceolata Harv., P. baccaridifolia Less., P gariepina A. Anderb., P. oxyodonta DC., P. retrofracta (Thunb.) Kies, P. tenuifolia Bolus, P. plumosa M. D. Hend., P. pinnatilobata (Klatt) O. Hoffm. ex Dinter, and P. senegalensis Cass., are treated cladistically, and a cladogram is presented. The species are illustrated, and their distributions mapped. Hypotheses on the mode of speciation and the biogeography of the group including a model of area relationships in southern Africa are presented.
S2x7x96c16c14c10	K. Bremer	1987	Tribal interrelationships of the Asteraceae	Cladistics	3		210-253				A cladistic analysis involving 27 tribes and subtribes of Asteraceae and 81 characters is presented. The terminal taxa are mainly those of present tribal classification, though some apparently poly- and paraphyletic tribes, notably the Mutisieae and the Inuleae, have been represented by subtribal taxa. Characters are assembled from all available sources. Corolla types, styles and stamens have provided many characters. The Lobeliaceae are used as an outgroup and are considered as the most probable sister group of the Asteraceae. There is a basal dichotomy in the family, the Mutisieae-Barnadesiinae being the monophyletic sister group of the remaining major, also monophyletic part of the family. The recent family division into two subfamilies about equal in size, the Cichorioideae and the Asteroideae, neither represents a basal dichotomy nor a sister group relationship within the Asteraceae. The Asteroideae are monophyletic and have their sister group within the paraphyletic Cichorioideae. Interrelationships among the cichorioid tribes are still unclear. The Lactuceae, Eremothamneae, Vernonieae and Liabeae may be one monophyletic group, and the Arctoteae, Carlineae, Echinopsideae and Cardueae another. The Mutisieae are a paraphyletic grade at the base of the family. Within the subfamily Asteroideae tribal interrelationships are also rather unclear. The Anthemideae and the Heliantheae sensu lato (including the Helenieae, Tageteae, Coreopsideae and all helenioid/helianthoid representatives sometimes placed in the Senecioneae) may be sister groups. The Heliantheae appear to be monophyletic and there is little support for the hypothesis that other tribes are derived from or have their sister group within the Heliantheae. The Astereae and the Eupatorieae may be sister groups, though a closer relationship between the Eupatorieae and the Heliantheae is possible. The Inuleae are a paraphyletic grade group at the base of the subfamily Asteroideae in the same way as the Mutiseae are a grade group at the base of the family.
S248	B. G. M. Jamieson;C. Erseus;M. Ferraguti	1987	Parsimony analysis of the phylogeny of some Oligochaeta (Annelida) using spermatozoal ultrastructure	Cladistics	3		145-155				Quantitative and qualitative ultrastructural data from the spermatozoa of 11 oligochaete species, representing all orders (Tubificida, Lumbriculida, and Haplotaxida, yielded a single most parsimonious tree, using the Wagner-tree (PAUP) method of Swofford (1984). The Haplotaxida (Haplotaxis through Megascolecidae) form a discrete monophyletic group, with inclusion, however, of the reproductively exceptional tubificidan Phreodrilus. Bythnomus, representing the Lumbriculidae, the phylogenetic position of which has been so controversial, forms the plesiomorphic sister group of the Haplotaxida, a position which is supported from other evidence. The Tubificida, represented by two tubificids (Rhizodrilus and Limnodriloides) and by the enchytraeid Lumbricillus, are plesiomorphic relative to the lumbriculid+haplotaxid assemblage and lie at the base of the tree but all three appear mutually paraphyletic. Monophyly of the Tubificida cannot, however, be considered conclusively refuted from the small sample used. Lumbricillus appears to have the most plesiomorphic sperm in the investigated oligochaetes The Megascolecidae (Amynthas and Fletcherodrilus) form the highest affinity and most apomorphic group. The implications of relative apomorphy of the Lumbriculida (Bythnomus) are profound. Branchiobdellids and leeches are generally regarded as sharing a common ancestry with lumbriculids and would, because of the revised position of the latter, cladistically constitute part of the Oligochaeta sensu lato.
S281	J. Gauthier;A. G. Kluge;T. Rowe	1988	Amniote phylogeny and the importance of fossils	Cladistics	4		105-209				Several prominent cladists have questioned the importance of fossils in phylogenetic inference, and it is becoming increasingly popular to simply fit extinct forms, if they are considered at all, to a cladogram of Recent taxa. Gardiner's (1982) and L¯vtrup's (1985) study of amniote phylogeny exemplifies this differential treatment, and we focused on that group of organisms to test the proposition that fossils cannot overturn a theory of relationships based only on the Recent biota. Our parsimony analysis of amniote phylogeny, special knowledge contributed by fossils being scrupulously avoided, led to the following best fitting classification, which is similar to the novel hypothesis Gardiner published: (lepidosaurs (turtles (mammals (birds, crocodiles)))). However, adding fossils resulted in a markedly different most parsimonious cladogram of the extant taxa: (mammals (turtles (lepidosaurs ( birds, crocodiles) ) ) ). That classification is like the traditional hypothesis, and it provides a better fit to the stratigraphic record. To isolate the extinct taxa responsible for the latter classification, the data were successively partitioned with each phylogenetic analysis, and we concluded that: ( I ) the ingroup, not the outgroup, fossils were important; (2) synapsid, not reptile, fossils were pivotal; (3) certain synapsid fossils, not the earliest or latest, were responsible. The critical nature of the synapsid fossils seemed to lie in the particular combination of primitive and derived character states they exhibited. Classifying those fossils, along with mammals, as the sister group to the lineage consisting of birds and crocodiles resulted in a relatively poor fit to data, one involving a 2 4 fold increase in evolutionary reversals! Thus, the importance of the critical fossils, collectively or individually, seems to reside in their relative primitiveness, and the simplest explanation for their more conservative nature is that they have had less time to evolve. While fossils may be important in phylogenetic inference only under certain conditions, there is no compelling reason to prejudge their contribution. We urge systematists to evaluate fairly all of the available evidence.
S298	J. A. Hart	1988	Rust fungi and host plant coevolution: do primitive hosts harbor primitive parasites?	Cladistics	4	4	339-366				The classical view of rust phylogeny is that rusts found on ferns and conifers are primitive, while rusts that parasitize angiosperms are advanced. This beliefwas based on the theory that primitive hosts harbor primitive parasites; that is, it assumed coevolution (co-speciation) of hosts and parasites. A cladistic analysis of 30 genera and 28 characters representative of the major patterns of rust fungi diversity is presented. The results of this analysis suggest that tropical short-cycle rusts on angiosperms form the cladistically basal group of rusts, while the rusts on conifers and ferns (Melampsoraceae sensu lato) form a nested terminal clade. These results suggest that rusts and their hosts have not undergone a long period of parallel cladogenesis (co-speciation); host transfer has probably been at least as frequent as co-speciation. The cladograms indicate evolutionary trends of spore stages and life history: urediniospores evidently preceded the evolution of aeciospores and pycniospores within Uredinales, and heteroecism is a derived condition which evolved at least several times. This study stresses the importance of making use of independent cladistic analyses of both host and parasite in order to test assumptions of coevolution and host transfer. In cases of strict parasitism, the antiquity of the host reffects that of the parasite and vice versa, for the hosts and parasites evolve more or less together. Savile, 1955
S297	B. G. M. Jamieson	1988	On the phylogeny and higher classification of the Oligochaeta	Cladistics	4		367-410				The 50 oligochaete taxa representing all families of opisthoporous oligochaetes (Alluroididae, earthworms and aquatic megadriles) together with two representatives of the Haplotaxidac and thrcc examples of microdiles were subjected to cladistic analysis using the PAUP program. Sixty-eight characters used in the analyses were derived from a comprehensive range of somatic and genital systems. T he optimal result, in terms of maximal number of characters attd taxa and of parsimony, produced two trees (consistency index 0.362) differing only in the placement of the mottotypic clade for the family Lumbriculidae. From a line originating from the presumed octogonadial ancestor, the following branches were derived, in sequence from the basal to most derived (new =Asterisked): subclass Randiellata* (order Randiellida*, Randiellidae); subclass Tubificata* (order Tubificida, Tubificidae Naididae computed and others not computed); subclass Lumbriculata* (order Lumbricuiida, Lumbriculidae); superorder Haplotaxidea* (order Haplotaxida, Haplotaxidae); order Moniligastrida (Moniligastridae); suborder Alluroidina (Alluroididae and Syngenodrilidae); cohort Aquamegadrili* (with, in succession, superfamilies Sparganophiloidea, Sparganophilidae; Biwadriloidea, Biwadrilidae, and Almoidea-Lutodrilidae and Almidae, including (Criodrilus); superfamily Eudriloidea*, superfamily Lumbricoidea and, as the adelphotaxon of the latter, tht superfamily Megascolecoidea. Intermediate nodes were given the following names, with the adelphotaxon through to the .Megascolecoidea, M, in parentheses: subclass Diplotesticulata (Haplotaxidea M); superorder Metagynopohora* (Moniligastrida M); order Opisthopora (Alluroidina M); suborder Crassiclitellata* (Aquamegadrili M); cohort Terrimegadrili* (Ocnerodriloidea M); unnamed (Eudriloidea M); unnamed (Lumbricoidea and Megascolecoidea). Recognition of the Randiellata, which alone were added intuitively and not computed, and the position of the Lumbriculata, are tentative. Location of the Lumbricoidea as the adelphotaxon of,t restricted Mcgascoecloidea is heuristic, but the alternative depiction of lumbricoids in some analyses, as the adelphotaxon of an ocnerodrilid-eudrilid-megascolecoid clade (the conventional Megascolecoidea s. lat.), is not conclusively dismissed.
S220	A. Tehler	1988	A cladistic outline of the Eumycota	Cladistics	4		227-277				A cladistic classification of fungi determined by a parsimony method with 21 terminal taxa and 51 characters is presented. Outgroup comparison with Oomycetes determined polarity assessments. The group Eumycota, including the traditional taxa Hyphochytriomycetes, Chytridio-mycetes, Zygomycetes, Ascomycetes and Basidiomycetes, is defined by two synapomorphies, molecular weight Or 25S RNA, and chitin cell walls. Some groups are supported as monophyletic; Eumycota, Amastigomycota, Dicaryomycotina, Ascomycetes, Protobasidiomycetes, Basidiomycetes, Euascomycetidae, Hymenomycetidae and Homobasidiomycetales. The Hyphochytriomycota is the sister group to remaining groups. The Taphrinaceae and Saccharomycetaceae are more closely related to the Basidiomycetes than to any of the ascomycetous groups. In the absence of unique character sets groups such as the Mastigomycotina, Hemiascomycetes, Ustomycetes, Holobasidiomycetes, Heterobasidiomyceles, Phragmobasidiomycetes and the Teliomycetes cannot be maintained and are abandoned as paraphyletic. Characters and terminal taxa used for the analysis are defined and discussed.
S11x4x95c21c00c08	D. E. Boufford;J. V. Crisci;H. Tobe;P. C. Hoch	1990	A cladistic analysis of Circaea (Onagraceae)	Cladistics	6		171-182				Circaea (Onagraceae), a genus of seven species from the northern hemisphere, forms a monophyletic group defined by the following synapomorphies: two stamens (opposite the sepals), fruits indehiscent capsules, hooked hairs on the fruits, and perianth parts reduced to two. A cladistic analysis of the genus was performed using 22 characters from morphology, anatomy and palynology. The seven species and seven additional subspecies were considered the terminal taxa. Polarity of the characters is based on the outgroup comparison method. Eighteen equally parsimonious cladograms were produced, each with 32 steps and a consistency index of 0.75. A successive weighting procedure was applied, resulting in six cladograms with a consistency index of 0.95. All 24 cladograms share the following seven monophyletic groups: (1) all species except C. cordata and C. glabrescens (stipules deciduous); (2) the group of C. mollis, the three subspecies of C. lutetiana and C. erubescens (exserted nectary); (3) C. repens and all six subspecies of C. alpina (single-seeded fruits, stolons terminated by tubers, and viscin threads reduced or absent); (4) the six subspecies of C. alpina (unilocular ovaries with no trace of a second locule and tardily opening perianth); (5) C. alpina subspecies alpina, micrantha, pacifica, and imaicola (flowers opening on ascending to erect pedicels); (6) C. alpina subspecies alpina, micrantha, and pacifica ( translucent leaves); (7 ) C. alpina subspecies alpina and micrantha (glabrous stems) . Results of the cladistic analysis support most of the current systematic classification of the genus, except for the relationships among the three subspecies of C. lutetiana.
S253	H. Loconte;D. W. Stevenson	1991	Cladistics of the magnoliidae	Cladistics	7		267-296				A cladistic resolution is presented for the origin of the angiosperms based on a parsimony analysis of 49 taxa of Magnoliidae. Hamamelidae and Alismatidae, with gymnospermous outgroup comparisons for the polarization of 104 characters. The Magnoliidae is recognized as a paraphyletic assemblage of nine orders: Calycanthales, Magnoliales, Laurales, Illiciales, Lactoridales, Ranunculales, Aristolochiales, Piperales and Nymphaeales. The Calycanthaceae and Idiospermaceae are segregated as the new order Calycanthales, which is hypothesized to be the archetype for angiosperms. Excluding Winteraceae and Lactoridaceae, the Magnoliales is monophyletic. The Austrobaileyaceae is a first branch of Magnoliales, rather than lauralean. Excluding Amborellaceae and Calycanthales, the Laurales is monophyletic. The Chloranthaceae is a first branch of Laurales, rather than piperalean. The Amborellaceae and Winteraceae are early branches of Illiciales. The Lactoridaceae is isolated as the Lactoridales. Including Papaveraceae, the Ranunculales is monophyletic, with Lardizabalaceae as a first branch. The Ranunculales is more closely related to the Hamamelidae, forming the clade Tricolpates. The Aristolochiales, Piperales and Nymphaeales are successively more closely related to the Alismatidae, forming the clade Paleoherbs. The Nelumbonaceae are nyrnphaealean Paleoherbs, rather than Tricolpates. The Lactoridaceae is not a Paleoherb. These results support many aspects of the strobilar-flower hypothesis for the origin of the angiosperms, as well as the plesiomorphic character states of woody shrubs with simple, pinnatelyveined leaves.
S370	W. C. Wheeler;C. Y. Hayashi	1998	The phylogeny of extant chelicerate orders	Cladistics	14	2	173-192	10.1111/j.1096-0031.1998.tb00331.x			The phylogeny of the extant chelicerate orders is examined in the light of morphological and molecular evidence. Representatives from each of the chelicerate orders and mandibulate and onychophoran outgroups are examined. Molecular (small and large ribosomal subunit DNA) and morphological information is combined in a total evidence regime to determine the most consistent picture of extant chelicerate relationships for these data. Multiple phylogenetic analyses are performed with variable analysis parameters yielding largely consistent results. A normalized incongruence length metric is used to assay the relative merit of the multiple analyses. The combined analysis with lowest character incongruence yields the scheme of relationships (Pycnogonida+ (Xiphosura+((Opiliones+((Solifugae+Pseudoscorpiones)+Scorpiones)),((Ricinulei+Acari)+(Palpigradi+ ((Thelyphonida+Schizomida=Uropygi)+(Amblypygi+ Araneae))))))). This result is fairly robust to variation in analysis parameters, with the placement of solifugids and the status of the pedipalps responsible for most disagreement.
S401	M. A. O'Leary	1999	Parsimony analysis of total evidence from extinct and extant taxa, and the cetacean-artiodactyl question	Cladistics	15	3	315-330	10.1111/j.1096-0031.1999.tb00269.x			Many molecule-based phylogenetic analyses find that the mammalian order Artiodactyla (even-toed ungulates) is paraphyletic unless cetaceans (whales, dolphins and porpoises) are nested within it, a hypothesis that runs contrary to traditional morphology-based ideas. Here I present a total evidence analysis of this question based on 10 extant and 27 extinct taxa, using two character data partitions: (1) skeletal data, and (2) neontological data (soft morphology, retroposons, and DNA sequences [g-fibrinogen, b-casein, and k-casein and mt cytochrome b]). A sensitivity analysis varying gap cost and transversion-transition ratio over nine parameters was implemented in the sequence alignment and in the parsimony analysis. The two data partitions are significantly incongruent, and the neontological data partition includes over six times as many characters as the osteological data partition. The osteological data partition, however, samples almost three times more taxa, taxa that cannot be sampled for neontological data because they are extinct. Osteological data resulted in artiodactyl monophyly, and neontological data in artiodactyl paraphyly over all nine parameters. In the total evidence analysis the parameter most congruent with the overall character data is unresolved as to the sister taxon of Cetacea, however the Adams consensus tree favors the neontological result. Extinction of almost 90% of the clade of interest, and particularly poor knowledge of stem taxa at the base of Artiodactyla make resolution of conflicting molecule- and morphology-based phylogenetic signals particularly difficult.
S486	L. Prendini	2000	Phylogeny and classification of the superfamily Scorpionoidea Latreille 1802 (Chelicerata, Scorpiones): an exemplar approach	Cladistics	16	1	1-78	10.1111/j.1096-0031.2000.tb00348.x			S. A. Stockwell (1989, Revision of the Phylogeny and Higher Classification of Scorpions (Chelicerata). Univ. of California, Berkeley) proposed a cladogram and revised classification for the superfamily Scorpionoidea Latreille 1802 (comprising the families Bothriuridae, Diplocentridae, Heteroscorpionidae, Ischnuridae, and Scorpionidae), based on 47 morphological characters and 35 supraspecific terminal taxa, representing genera whose monophyly was implicitly assumed. Given the widespread practice of defining scorpion genera on the basis of plesiomorphic character states, the assumption of monophyly implicit in supraspecific terminal taxa reduces confidence in Stockwell's cladistic findings and, consequently, his revised suprageneric classification. A re-investigation of scorpionoid phylogeny is presented here, based on 115 morphological characters (including the characters used by Stockwell) and 71 exemplar species. The criterion of maximal morphological diversity was employed for exemplar selection. This approach provides a stronger test of monophyly than random exemplar selection. Sixteen cladistic analyses were'performed on the scorpionoid data matrix, which varied in the use of equal, successive, or implied weights and in the additive or nonadditive treatment of multistate characters. The preferred hypothesis, a single most parsimonious tree obtained by analysis with equal weights and 13 ordered multistate characters, yielded the scheme of relationships: (Bothriuridae ((Heteroscorpionidae Urodacinae) ((Hemiscorpiinae Ischnuridae) (Diplocentridae Scorpioninae)))). On the basis of these results, revisions are proposed to the existing suprageneric classification of the Scorpionoidea, including new diagnoses, new descriptions, and an illustrated key to the families and subfamilies. Familial status is provided for the scorpionid subfamilies Hemiscorpiinae and Urodacinae.
S1235	K. Worsaae	2005	Phylogeny of Nerillidae (Polychaeta, Annelida) as inferred from combined 18S rDNA and morphological data	Cladistics							A phylogeny of the meiofaunal polychaete family Nerillidae based on morphological, molecular, and combined data is presented here. Sequences of 18S rDNA and 40 morphological characters of 17 taxa are included in the data sets. The sequences were analyzed simultaneously with the morphological data by direct optimization in the program POY with a variety of parameter sets (costs of gaps: transversions: transitions). Three outgroups were selected from the major polychaete group Aciculata and one from Scolecida. The 13 nerillid species from 11 genera were monophyletic in all analyses with very high support and three new apomorphies for Nerillidae are identified. The topology of the ingroup varied according to the various parameter settings. Reducing the number of outgroups to one decreased the variance among the phylogenetic hypotheses. The congruence among these was tested and a parameter set, with equal weights (222) and extension gap weighted 1, yielded minimum incongruence (ILD). Several terminal clades of the combined analysis were highly supported, as well as the position of Leptonerilla prospera as sister terminal to the other nerillids. Evolution of morphological characters such as segment numbers, chaetae, appendages and ciliation are traced and discussed. A regressive pathway within Nerillidae is indicated for several characters, however, generally implying several convergent losses. Numerous genera are shown to require revision.
S1583	V. Rousset;F. Pleijel;G. W. Rouse;C. Erséus;M. E. Siddall	2006	A molecular phylogeny of annelids	Cladistics							We present parsimony analyses of annelids based on the largest taxon sample and most extensive molecular data set yet assembled, with two nuclear ribosomal genes (18S rDNA and the D1 region of 28S rDNA), one nuclear protein coding-gene (Histone H3) and one mitochondrial ribosomal gene (16S rDNA) from 217 terminal taxa. Of these, 267 sequences are newly sequenced, and the remaining were obtained from GenBank. The included taxa are based on the criteria that the taxon must have 18S rDNA or at least two other loci. Our analyses show that 68% of annelid family-ranked taxa represented by more than one taxon in our study are supported by a jackknife value >50%. In spite of the size of our data set, the phylogenetic signal in the deepest part of the tree remains weak and the majority of the currently recognized major polychaete clades (except Amphinomida and Aphroditiformia) could not be recovered. Terbelliformia is monophyletic (with the exclusion of Pectinariidae, for which only 18S data was available), whereas members of taxa such as Phyllodocida, Cirratuliformia, Sabellida and Scolecida are scattered over the trees. Clitellata is monophyletic, although Dinophilidae should possibly be included, and Clitellata has a sister group within the polychaetes. One major problem is the current lack of knowledge on the closest relatives to annelids and the position of the annelid root. We suggest that the poor resolution in the basal parts of the trees presented here may be due to lack of signal connected to incomplete data sets both in terms of terminal and gene sampling, rapid radiation events and/or uneven evolutionary rates and long-branch attraction.
S1627	U. Swenson;I. V. Bartish;J. Munzinger	2006	Phylogeny, diagnostic characters, and generic limitation of Australasian Chrysophylloideae (Sapotaceae, Ericales): Evidence from ITS sequence data and morphology	Cladistics							Current generic limits in Chrysophylloideae (Sapotaceae) from Australia, New Caledonia, and the Pacific islands have been shown not to correspond to monophyletic groups. In particular, revisions of generic boundaries are necessary for Pouteria and Niemeyera. We present the first cladistic study of a large representative sample from these areas based on (1) nuclear ribosomal DNA (nrDNA) sequence data and (2) combined data of nrDNA and morphology. The data was analyzed with parsimony jackknifing using equal weights and gaps coded as binary characters. Our results from the two data sets are highly congruent and morphological data often increase support as well as tree resolution. A basal polytomy prevents hypotheses of intergeneric relationships, but several groups receive strong support, and hence, four segregates of Pouteria (Beccariella, Planchonella, Sersalisia, and Van-royena) are resurrected. Four others, Albertisiella, Bureavella, Iteiluma, and Pyriluma are rejected. Niemeyera is redefined as a small genus confined to Australia. Generic limits within the sister group to Niemeyera are still unclear, a group which includes Leptostylis and Pycnandra. Furthermore, Van-royena may have originated from an intergeneric hybridization event. Traditionally used and newly identified morphological characters are scrutinized for their diagnostic value. For instance, the position of stamen insertion within the corolla tube is a strong indication of generic relationship. Unique synapomorphies are rare and genera must be distinguished on character state combinations. Following the results, several taxonomic combinations are necessary (Beccariella brownlessiana, B. macrocarpa, B. singuliflora, B. vieillardii, Pichonia daenikeri, Planchonella asterocarpon, P. dothioense, P. myrsinifolia, P. myrsinodendron, and P. xylocarpa).
S1795	M. J. Bayly;F. Udovicic;A. K. Gibbs;C. Parra-Osorio;P. Y. Ladiges	2007	Ribosomal DNA pseudogenes are widespread in the eucalypt group (Myrtaceae): implications for phylogenetic analysis	Cladistics							Pseudogenes from the 18Sˆ5.8Sˆ26S cistron of nuclear ribosomal DNA are reported in the eucalypt group (Myrtaceae), which includes seven genera. Putative pseudogenes are identified by a range of sequence comparisons including: the number of CpG and CpNpG methylation sites, GC content, estimated secondary structure stability of ITS transcripts, the presence of conserved motifs, patterns of sequence relationships and inferred substitution patterns. These comparisons indicate that pseudogenes are widespread, being evident in Eucalyptus (subgenera Eucalyptus and Eudesmia), Corymbia (extracodical sections Rufaria, Ochraria and Blakearia), Angophora, Stockwellia quadrifida and Arillastrum gummiferum. At least six sequences used in previous phylogenetic studies are identified as pseudogenes, and a further 10 pseudogenes are newly sequenced here. Gene trees place pseudogenes in a number of distinct lineages: pseudogenes from Eucalyptus group with other Eucalyptus sequences, those from Corymbia and Angophora group with other Corymbia/Angophora sequences, that from Stockwellia groups with other sequences from the Eucalyptopsis group, and that from Arillastrum is placed as sister to the other included sequence of Arillastrum. Some pseudogenes in Eucalyptus, Corymbia and Angophora represent „deep‰ rDNA paralogues that pre-date species differentiation in these groups, and a recombination analysis shows no evidence of recombination between putative pseudogenes and their functional counterparts. The presence of divergent paralogues presents both challenges and opportunities for the reconstruction of eucalypt phylogenies using ribosomal DNA sequences. Phylogenetic datasets should include only orthologous sequences, but different paralogues potentially provide additional, independent, character sets for phylogenetic analyses.
S2213	C. M. R. Kelly;N. P. Barker;M. H. Villet;D. G. Broadley	2008	Phylogeny, biogeography and classification of the snake superfamily Elapoidea: a rapid radiation in the late Eocene	Cladistics	24						The snake superfamily Elapoidea presents one of the most intransigent problems in systematics of the Caenophidia. Its monophyly is undisputed and several cohesive constituent lineages have been identified (including the diverse and clinically important family Elapidae), but its basal phylogenetic structure is obscure. We investigate phylogenetic relationships and spatial and temporal history of the Elapoidea using 94 caenophidian species and approximately 2300 ˆ 4300 bases of DNA sequence from one nuclear and four mitochondrial genes. Phylogenetic reconstruction was conducted in a parametric framework using complex models of sequence evolution. We employed Bayesian relaxed clocks and Penalized Likelihood with rate smoothing to date the phylogeny, in conjunction with seven fossil calibration constraints. Elapoid biogeography was investigated using maximum likelihood and maximum parsimony methods. Resolution was poor for early relationships in the Elapoidea and in Elapidae and our results imply rapid basal diversification in both clades, in the late Eocene of Africa (Elapoidea) and the mid-Oligocene of the Oriental region (Elapidae). We identify the major elapoid and elapid lineages, present a phylogenetic classification system for the superfamily (excluding Elapidae), and combine our phylogenetic, temporal and biogeographic results to provide an account of elapoid evolution in light of current palaeontological data and palaeogeographic models.
S2228	D. T. Ksepka	2008	Broken gears in the avian molecular clock: new phylogenetic analyses support stem galliform status for Gallinuloides wyomingensis and rallid affinities for Amitabha urbsinterdictensis	Cladistics							Galliformes (landfowl) have been the focus of numerous divergence dating studies that seek a refined understanding of the early radiation of living birds. The Eocene fossil birds Amitabha urbsinterdictensis (Bridger Formation) and Gallinuloides wyomingensis (Green River Formation) have been used extensively in studies dealing with the timing of evolution in crown Galliformes. Divergence estimates from studies incorporating these fossils as calibration points suggest that multiple galliform lineages radiated in the Cretaceous and survived the Cretaceous-Tertiary mass extinction. However, the phylogenetic position of both fossils has been disputed, particularly with regard to crown or stem status. In order to resolve this debate, a new study of A. urbsinterdictensis and G. wyomingensis was undertaken. Further preparation and reexamination of the A. urbsinterdictensis holotype indicates this fossil falls outside both crown and stem Galliformes, and reveals evidence for a relationship with Rallidae (rails). In order to reassess the status of G. wyomingensis, a matrix of 120 morphological characters was constructed by revising and expanding on previous studies. Phylogenetic analyses using this matrix place G. wyomingensis basal to all crown Galliformes. Stem placement of G. wyomingensis is retained and resolution is improved in combined analyses incorporating sequence data from cytochrome b, NADH dehydrogenase subunit 2, mitochondrial control region, 12S rDNA and nuclear ovomucoid intron G. All evidence indicates that A. urbsinterdictensis and G. wyomingensis are inappropriate internal calibration points for Galliformes and may have contributed to overestimation of divergence event ages. Though stem galliforms existed in the Cretaceous, the divergence of crown lineages in the Cretaceous is called into question. Because few galliform fossils have been evaluated phylogenetically, further investigations into the tempo of galliform evolution must await identification of proper fossil calibration points.
S2173	G. Petersen;O. Seberg	2008	Stowaway MITEs in Hordeum (Poaceae): Evolutionary History, Ancestral Elements, and Classification	Cladistics							Given the lack of direct observational data relating to transposition of Stowaway miniature inverted repeat transposable elements phylogenetic methods may provide a means of generating data that adds to our knowledge about these elements. In a phylogenetic framework the evolutionary history of homologous elements may be traced, and the nucleotide sequence of elements at or close to the time of insertion can be reconstructed. Based on a phylogeny of the diploid species of the genus Hordeum we explore evolutionary aspects of four non-homologous groups of Stowaway elements inserted into three nuclear genes: nucellin, xylose isomerase, and barley leucine zipper 1. The data illustrate how elements from a high degree of sequence similarity between terminal inverted repeat regions gradually degrade, and confirm previous notions about preferential insertion at particular TA target sites. It is shown how creation of consensus sequences as estimates of ancestral elements may be positively misleading. The Stowaway family of transposable elements is often further divided into subfamilies based on sequence similarity between element. Sequence similarity data from the elements discovered in the xylose isomerase gene and other element found through BLAST searches in GenBank, reveal inconsistency of the rules used for classification. In order to reflect natural groups a classification of transposable elements must be based on phylogenetic evidence rather than raw similarity.
S2409	M. Wolsan;J. J. Sato	2009	Effects of data incompleteness on the relative performance of parsimony and Bayesian approaches in a supermatrix phylogenetic reconstruction of Mustelidae and Procyonidae (Carnivora)	Cladistics	26	2	168-194	10.1111/j.1096-0031.2009.00281.x			Missing data are commonly thought to impede a resolved or accurate reconstruction of phylogenetic relationships, and probabilistic analysis techniques (such as Bayesian inference or maximum likelihood) are increasingly viewed as less vulnerable to the negative effects of data incompleteness than parsimony. We test both assumptions empirically by conducting parsimony and Bayesian analyses on a ~1.5 ~ 106-cell (27,965 characters ~ 52 species) mustelid-procyonid molecular supermatrix with 62.7% missing entries. Contrary to the first assumption, phylogenetic relationships inferred from our analyses are fully (Bayesian) or almost fully (parsimony) resolved topologically with mostly strong support and also largely in accord with prior molecular estimations of mustelid and procyonid phylogeny derived with parsimony, Bayesian, and other probabilistic analysis techniques from smaller but complete or nearly complete data sets. Contrary to the second assumption, we found no compelling evidence in support of a relationship between the inferior performance of parsimony and taxon incompleteness (i.e., the proportion of missing character data for a taxon), although we found evidence for a connection between the inferior performance of parsimony and character incompleteness (i.e., no overlap in character data between some taxa). The relatively good performance of our analyses may be related to the large number of sampled characters, so that most taxa (even highly incomplete ones) are represented by a sufficient number of characters allowing both approaches to resolve their relationships.
S2486	S. Stenroos;T. Laukka;S. Huhtinen;P. Döbbeler;L. Myllys;K. Syrjänen;J. Hyvönen	2009	Multiple origins of symbioses between ascomycetes and bryophytes suggested by a five-gene phylogeny	Cladistics	26		281-300	10.1111/j.1096-0031.2009.00284.x			Numerous species of microscopic fungi inhabit mosses and hepatics. They are severely overlooked and their identity and nutritional strategies are mostly unknown. Most of these bryosymbiotic fungi belong to the Ascomycota. Their fruit-bodies are extremely small, often reduced and simply structured, which is why they cannot be reliably identified and classified by their morphological and anatomical characters. A phylogenetic hypothesis of bryosymbiotic ascomycetes is presented. New sequences of 78 samples, including 61 bryosymbionts, were produced, the total amount of terminals being 206. Of these, 202 are Ascomycetes. Sequences from the following five gene loci were used: rDNA SSU, rDNA LSU, RPB2, mitochondrial rDNA SSU, and rDNA 5.8S. The program TNT was used for tree search and support value estimation. We show that bryosymbiotic fungi occur in numerous lineages, one of which represents a newly discovered lineage among the Ascomycota and exhibits a tripartite association with cyanobacteria and sphagna. A new genus Trizodia is proposed for this basal clade. Our results demonstrate that even highly specialized life strategies can be adopted multiple times during evolution, and that in many cases bryosymbionts appear to have evolved from saprobic ancestors.
S2549	K. M. Pitz;P. Sierwald	2010	Phylogeny of the millipede order Spirobolida (Arthropoda: Diplopoda: Helminthomorpha)	Cladistics	26	5	497-525	10.1111/j.1096-0031.2009.00303.x			This study examines relationships within the millipede order Spirobolida using an exemplar approach, sampling within families to maximize geographic and morphological diversity; due to lack of available material, Allopocockiidae and Hoffmanobolidae were not included in analyses. The focus of this study was to test monophyly of the order, the sub-orders, and the families of Spirobolida and to propose interfamilial relationships using morphological and molecular data in a total evidence approach. Both maximum parsimony analyses and Bayesian inference were employed to analyze two datasets consisting of combined morphological and molecular data, one aligned using progressive alignment methods and the second alignment guided by secondary structure models. Rhinocricidae was recovered sister to all remaining spirobolidan millipedes and is elevated to suborder status as suborder Rhinocricidea. Trigoniulidea was recovered monophyletic as was Spirobolidea excluding Rhinocricidae; Spirobolidea is redefined to reflect this change. All previously recognized families were recovered, with the exception of Spirobolidae; in all instances, this family was paraphyletic or part of a polytomy that lacked enough resolution to assess its monophyly. Our results reaffirm much of the existing taxonomic foundation within Spirobolida. This study provides the first phylogenetic test of higher-level relationships within Spirobolida and will serve as a foundation for future work in this group at finer levels.
S966	A. Weeks;A. Tye;B. B. Simpson	2004	Is the Galápagos IUCN vulnerable species Bursera malacophylla (Burseraceae) distinguishable genetically from its widespread sister, B. graveolens?	Conservation Genetics							Bursera species are common components of the Gal·pagos Arid and Transition Zone forests and are distributed on all forested islands in the oceanic archipelago. One of two Gal·pagos species, B. malacophylla, is an IUCN vulnerable species because it is endemic and narrowly distributed on islands close to population centers and tourist traffic. Its hypothesized progenitor and sister species, B. graveolens, has a much wider, mostly allopatric distribution in the Gal·pagos and on the American continents. Recent field work has identified sympatric populations of the two species as well as populations of morphologically intermediate individuals on Santa Cruz Island and San Salvador Island, which are next to the islands of distribution for B. malacophylla. These findings call into question whether B. malacophylla represents an independent lineage from that of B. graveolens and whether the intermediate populations represent hybrid progeny. Using AFLP fingerprint data for 87 accessions, we find extraordinarily low genetic variation within and among species across the archipelago, concordant with most other genetic studies of Gal·pagos plant species. We find no evidence to support hybrid origin for morphological intermediate populations and, based on cluster analysis and AMOVA tests, conclude that B. malacophylla does not represent a lineage separate from that of B. graveolens. We discuss the morphological distinctions between these two species, probable causes of their genetic homogeneity across the archipelago and recommend the reduction of B. malacophylla to B. graveolens forma malacophylla.
S1625	P. Q. Spinks;H. B. Shaffer	2006	Conservation phylogenetics of the Asian box turtles (Geoemydidea, Cuora): mitochondrial introgression, numts, and inferences from multiple nuclear loci	Conservation Genetics							Asian box turtles (genus Cuora, family Geoemydidae) comprise a clade of 12 aquatic and semiaquatic nominate species distributed across southern China and Southeast Asia. Over the last two decades, turtles throughout Asia have been harvested at an unsustainable rate to satisfy demands for food, traditional Chinese medicine, and the pet trade. Consequently, all species of Cuora were recently placed on the IUCN Red List, nine are currently listed as critically endangered by the IUCN, and all species are listed in Appendix II of CITES. We compiled a 67-specimen mitochondrial (~ 1650 base pairs (bp) from two mitochondrial genes) and a 40-specimen nuclear-plus-mitochondrial (~3900 bp total, three nuclear introns plus an additional ~ 860 bp mitochondrial gene fragment) DNA data set to reconstruct the phylogeny of Cuora species and to assess genetic diversity and species boundaries for several of the most problematic taxa. Our sampling included 23 C. trifasciata, 17 C. zhoui and 1-4 individuals of the remaining 10 species of Cuora. Maximum likelihood, maximum parsimony and Bayesian analyses all recovered similar, well resolved trees. Within the Cuora clade, mitochondrial and nuclear sequence data indicated that both C. zhoui and C. mccordi represent old lineages with little or no history of interspecific gene flow, suggesting that they are good genealogical species. Based on mtDNA, Cuora pani was paraphyletic and C. trifasciata was composed of two highly divergent lineages that were not each other's closest relatives; both cases of non-monophyly were due to a mtDNA sequence that was widespread and identical in C. aurocapitata, C. pani and C. trifasciata. However, when combined with nuclear DNA results, our data indicate that C. trifasciata is a single, monophyletic taxon, and that mitochondrial introgression and nuclear-mitochondrial pseudogenes have led to a complex pattern of mitochondrial gene relationships that does not reflect species-level histories. Our results imply that captive „assurance colonies‰ of both C. trifasciata and C. pani should be genotyped to identify pure, non-hybrid members of both taxa, and we recommend that introgressed and pure taxa be managed as independent entities until the full evolutionary histories of these critically endangered turtles are resolved.
S2324	S. Rocha;I. Ineich;D. James Harris	2009	Cryptic variation and recent bipolar range expansion within the Stumped-Toed Gecko Gehyra mutilata (Wiegmann, 1834) across Indian and Pacific Ocean Islands	Contributions to Zoology	78	1	1-8				With an impressively wide distribution, Gehyra mutilata is present on almost all Indian and Pacific Ocean islands and in large regions of Southeast Asia and Indonesia. Mitochondrial sequence data (~500 bp) from individuals covering large parts of its (mainly insular) distribution reveals deep cryptic variation and strong geographic structure, with two well differentiated lineages. Molecular data also reveals that the wide Indian and Pacific insular distribution of Gehyra is very recent and, at least across the Indian Ocean islands, most probably the result of human-aided dispersal, as no variation within this lineage was found. Further research is needed to determine geographic patterns of variation across Southeast Asia, the level of genetic variation, and possible mechanisms of speciation. If recognized as distinct taxa, the binomen Gehyra insulensis should be resurrected, and applied to the Pacific lineage .
S236	W. L. Fink;S. V. Fink	1986	A phylogenetic analysis of the genus Stomias, including the synonymization of Macrostomias	Copeia	1986		494-503				The eleven currently recognized species in the genus Stomias form a monophyletic group. Their interrelationships are hypothesized as follows: brevibarbatus and danae are sister taxa, forming the sister group to other members of the genus. S. longibarbatus and pacificus, both formerly placed in Macrostomias, form a sister lineage to the remaining species. S. colubrinus and lampropeltis are sister taxa, as are affinis and nebulosus. S. atriventer, boa and gracilis form a group, with the latter two as sister taxa. The relationships among the colubrinus, affinis and boa lineages remain unresolved, since there is conflicting evidence for two resolutions. Evidence for monophyly of the species is discussed.
S1598	K. C. Wollenberg;M. Veith;B. P. Noonan;S. Lötters	2006	Polymorphism versus species richness - Systematics of large Dendrobates from the eastern Guiana Shield (Amphibia: Dendrobatidae)	Copeia							A molecular phylogeny based on a fragment of the mitochondrial 16S rRNA gene and morphological comparisons suggest that only one polymorphic species of large Dendrobates, commonly assigned to D. tinctorius, occurs on the eastern Guiana Shield and its vicinities. The oldest available name for this taxon is D. tinctorius (Schneider, 1799). We place D. azureus Hoogmoed, 1969 as its junior synonym, and suspect that D. machadoi Bokermann, 1958 has to be treated in the same way. Dendrobates tinctorius exhibits numerous variants differing in color and pattern.
S574	G. Caetano-Anollés;R. N. Trigiano;M. T. Windham	2001	Patterns of evolution in Discula fungi and the origin of dogwood anthracnose in North America, studied using arbitrarily amplified and ribosomal DNA	Current Genetics	39	5-6	346-354	10.1007/s002940100223 		Discula; Dogwood anthracnose; ITS sequence; Ribosomal DNA	The anthracnose epidemic caused by exotic filamentous fungi of the genus Discula threatens the future of the prized flowering (Cornus florida L.) and Pacific (Cornus nuttalli Aud.) dogwoods in North America. A cross-section of fungi that cause anthracnose in broadleaf temperate trees was characterized using DNA amplification fingerprinting (DAF), sequence and secondary structure analysis of the internal transcribed spacers (ITS) of nuclear ribosomal DNA (rDNA), and compatibility of hyphal anastomosis. ITS-inferred phylogenies rejected the null hypothesis of only one fungal lineage by defining four monophyletic and well differentiated groups corresponding to Discula sp., D. quercina, D. umbrinella and D. destructiva, with the last two species sharing a common and recent ancestor. In turn, they showed that the dogwood pathogen D. destructiva did not evolve directly from an indigenous population related to Discula sp. In this study, rDNA spacers that are generally considered important for protein synthesis but selectively neutral, appeared functionally constrained and subject to selective sequence diversification. Results confirmed the high variability of D. umbrinella and remarkable homogeneity and exotic nature of D. destructiva at the genetic level, clarified the taxonomy and phylogeny of Discula, and provided clues as to the origin and diversification of dogwood anthracnose-causing fungi.
S2051	F. N. Martin	2008	Mitochondrial haplotype determination in the oomycete plant pathogen Phytophthora ramorum	Current Genetics							The mitochondrial genome of an isolate of P. ramorum from Europe (EU) was sequenced and compared to the previously published genome sequence of an isolate from California (NA). The EU mitochondrial genome had the identical gene order and encoded for the same suite of genes as the NA mitochondrial genome, but had 13 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and at 39,494 bp was 180 bp longer. This length difference was due to an increase in the size of the spacer region between the nad5 and nad6 genes caused by a chimeric region containing duplication of the spacer sequence and additional sequences from the flanking genes. Recombination between the 1,150 bp-inverted repeats (IR) generated orientational isomers where the gene order was reversed between the IR. A total of 7 primer pairs were developed for amplification of regions where the SNPs were located and 2 other regions where additional SNPs were encountered when a larger number of isolates were examined. Sequence data for a total of 5,743 bp for 40 isolates collected from a range of geographic areas was compared and 28 loci were found to be polymorphic. The combination of these polymorphisms revealed a total of 4 mitochondrial haplotypes; the traditional EU (haplotype I), the traditional NA (haplotype IIa), the third nuclear lineage of the pathogen recovered from a nursery in Washington State (haplotype III) and a new haplotype representing a subgroup of NA isolates from an Oregon forest (haplotype IIb). Phylogenetic analysis using the sequences generated from the haplotype analysis supported a high affinity for haplotypes IIa and IIb, both of which were distinct from haplotype I, with haplotype I basal to these and haplotype III representing the ancestral state.
S1402	J. Lee;S. F. Baum;S. Oh;C. Jiang;J. Chen;J. L. Bowman	2005	Recruitment of CRABS CLAW to promote nectary development within the eudicot clade	Development	132		5051-5032				Nectaries are secretory organs that are widely present in flowering plants that function to attract floral pollinators. Owing to diversity in nectary positions and structures, they are thought to have originated multiple times during angiosperm evolution, with their potential contribution to the diversification of flowering plants and pollinating animals being considerable. We investigated the genetic basis of diverse nectary forms in eudicot angiosperm species using CRABS CLAW (CRC), a gene required for nectaries in Arabidopsis. CRC expression is conserved in morphologically different nectaries from several core eudicot species and is required for nectary development in both rosids and asterids, two major phylogenetic lineages of eudicots. However, in a basal eudicot species, no evidence of CRC expression in nectaries was found. Considering the phylogenetic distribution of nectary positions and CRC expression analyses in eudicots, we propose that diverse nectaries in core eudicots share conserved CRC gene regulation, and that derived nectary positions in eudicots have altered regulation of CRC. As the ancestral function of CRC lies in the regulation of carpel development, it may have been co-opted as a regulator of nectary development within the eudicots, concomitant with the association of nectaries with reproductive organs in derived lineages.
S1735	A. L. Szalanski;C. B. Owens	2003	Sequence Change and Phylogenetic Signal in Muscoid COII DNA Sequences	DNA Sequence	14	4	331-334				The complete DNA sequence of the mtDNA cytochrome oxidase II gene from house fly, Musca domestica, face fly, Musca autumnalis, stable fly, Stomoxys calcitrans, horn fly, Haematobia irritans, and black garbage fly, Hydrotaea aenescens, are reported. The nucleotide sequence codes for a 229 amino acid peptide. The COII sequence is A+T rich (74.1%), with up to 12.3% nucleotide and 8.4% amino acid divergence among the five taxa. Of the 688 nucleotides encoding for the gene, 135 nucleotide sites (19.6%) are variable, and 55 (8.0%) are phylogenetically informative. A phylogenetic analysis using three calliphorids as the outgroup taxa, indicates that the two haematophagus species, horn fly and stable fly, form a sister group.
S674	S. Liede;A. Täuber;J. Schneidt	2002	Molecular considerations on the Tylophorinae K. Schum. (Apocynaceae - Asclepiadoideae)	Edinburgh Journal of Botany	59	3	377-403	10.1017/S0960428602000239		Apocynaceae; Asclepiadaceae; Asclepiadoideae; ITS; molecular systematics ; trnT-L spacer; trnL intron; trnL-F spacer; Tylophorinae	More than 30 collections of Tylophora from all over its geographic range were analysed together with representatives of all other genera in subtribe Tylophorinae except Rhyncharrhena. Regions of the chloroplast genome (trnT-L spacer, trnL intron and trnL-F spacer) as well as the nuclear genome (internal transcribed spacer including 5.8S of nuclear ribosomal DNA) were sequenced. Both the cpDNA dataset and the rDNA dataset yield a number of stable clades, but a completely resolved and stable phylogeny is not obtained from either alone or by combining them. The small East African and Arabian genera Blyttia, Diplostigma, Goydera and Pleurostelma form a well-supported clade in both datasets. Pentatropis is always recognized as monophyletic. Vincetoxicum is not clearly separable from Tylophora, and probably covers the temperate species, while Tylophora covers those in the tropics and subtropics.
S343	M. J. Ramírez	1995	A phylogenetic analysis of the subfamilies of Anyphaenidae (Arachnida, Araneae)	Entomologica Scandinavica	26	4	361-384	10.1163/187631295X00053	http://www.ingentaconnect.com/content/brill/ise/1995/00000026/00000004/art00001		Anyphaenidae are diagnosed by the pattern of tracheal system, the forwardly advanced tracheal spiracle, and the lamelliform claw tufi setae. Cladistic analyses of the relationships of the anyphaenid genera are made from a selection of 9 exemplar taxa scored for 20 characters. In result, three subfamilies are proposed. Malenellinae subfam. n. is erected for Malenella nana gen. & sp. n. from southern Chile. This subfamily is considered as the sister group of all other anyphaenids. Anyphaeninae and Amaurobioidinae form a monophyletic group united by the orientation of the claw tufi setae and the grooved cymbial tip. Anyphaeninae are diagnosed by three characters associated with the advancement of the spiracle toward the epigastric furrow. Amaurobioidinae are diagnosed by the ingression of the median hematodocha in the male tegulum, and a characteristic secondary conductor. The relationships among the genera of Amaurobioidinae are discussed. The complex tracheal system of anyphaenids develops, during ontogeny, from a simple four-branched system. The genera Aysenia (from Clubionidae), Philisca (from Miturgidae) and Sanogasta (from Corinnidae) are transferred to Anyphaenidae: Amaurobioidinae. M. J. Ramirez, Department of Biology, FCEyN, Pabell6n 11 Ciudad Universitaria, 1428 Buenos Aires, Argentina. Current address: Museo Argentino de Ciencias Naturales, Av. Angel Gallardo 470, 1405 Buenos Aires, Argentina.
S471	R. de Jong;R. I. Vane-Wright;P. R. Ackery	1996	The higher classification of butterflies (Lepidoptera): problems and prospects	Entomologica Scandinavica	27	1	65-101	10.1163/187631296X00205	http://www.ingentaconnect.com/content/brill/ise/1996/00000027/00000001/art00004		Progress in understanding the higher classification of butterflies has not kept pace with increase in the number of described species. Important points of uncertainty or contention include, apart from ranking problems, monophyly of Papilionoidea plus Hesperioidea, their relationship with other Lepidoptera in general and the Hedyloidea in particular, the question of the sister group of the Pieridae (either Papilionidae, or Lycaenidae + Nymphalidae), and the division of families into subfamilies. Traditional groupings are discussed and compared with the results of a cladistic analysis using 103 characters and 74 species (59 butterflies and 15 moths). The cladistic analysis supports a number of currently held views about butterfly classification, such as monophyly of five major family groupings (Hesperiidae, Papilionidae, Pieridae, Lycaenidae and Nymphalidae) and suggests sister group relationships between Papilionoidea and Hesperioidea, and Pieridae and (Lycaenidae + Nymphalidae). Most traditional subfamilies, however, are not supported on the basis of the data set used but the Riodininae, which always appeared as a monophyletic, subordinate group within the Lycaenidae, are a notable exception. Further, the analysis suggests that, contrary to traditional ideas, the Parnassiinae, not Baroniinae, are sister to the remainder of the Papilionidae, Pseudopontiinae are internal to (Pierinae + Coliadinae), Dismorphiinae are sister to all other Pieridae, and that Liptena, Poritia and Miletus represent the closest relatives of the Riodininae. The data set is not well suited for an assessment of the position of the butterflies amongst other Lepidoptera. Nevertheless, of the moths used, Macrosoma (Hedylidae, Hedyloidea) and Urania (Uraniidae, Geometroidea) appear to be the closest relatives of the butterflies. With regard to the higher classification of the butterflies many problems thus remain, and several ways to tackle these are discussed. The need for some form of international co-operation between fieldworkers, comparative morphologists and molecular systematists is stressed.
S469	S. Morinaka;T. Maeyama;K. Maekawa;D. Erniwati;S. N. Prijono;I. K. Ginarsa;T. Nakazawa;T. Hidaka	1999	Molecular phylogeny of birdwing butterflies based on the representatives in most genera of the tribe Troidini (Lepidoptera: Papilionidae)	Entomological Science	2	3	347-358		http://ci.nii.ac.jp/naid/110003374598/	Birdwing butterflies; mitochondrial DNA; ND5; Ornithoptera; phylogeny; Troides; Troidini	The phylogenetic relationship among birdwing butterflies, including some species in most genera of the tribe Troidini, was investigated using nucleotide sequences of the ND5 gene obtained from mitochondrial DNA. Species of the genera Ornithoptera and Troides in the study were shown to be closely related. Species of the subgenus Ornithoptera also displayed a very close relationship, as well as species of the subgenus Schoenbergia. The genera Pachliopta and Losaria, as well as Atrophaneura and Byasa, were suggested to be closely related. On the other hand, Battus is excluded from the Troidini phylogenetically. the common ancestor of Ornithoptera and Troides was supposed to have evolved either in the region that includes Australia and New Guinea Island, or in a part of South-east Asia, and diverged into the two genera before or after the time when fragments of Gondwanaland collided against Asia.
S295	R. Cloutier	1991	Patterns, trends, and rates of evolution within the Actinistia	Environmental Biology of Fishes	32	1-4	23-58	10.1007/bf00007444			The interrelationships of 31 actinistian species (including Latimeria chalumnae) are analyzed based on a cladistic analysis of 75 osteological characters. Inference of evolutionary trends (e.g., mod)fication of body shape and skull morphology) from the phylogenetic patterns demonstrates that the morphology of actinistians is less conservative than has been proposed previously. This empirical cladistic approach supports two distinct tempos of evolution during an evolutionary history of 380 million years. Along a phylogenetic pathway originating with a Devonian stem-species and ending with the living Latimeria chalumnae (including 101 morphological changes and 18 cladogenetic events), the first tempo occurred during the Devonian - Permian periods as a decreasing rate of morphological changes, which was followed by a stabilizing tempo during the Permian - Recent periods. The decreasing tempo is characterized by a sequence of gradual versus quantum temporal changes and low versus faster rates, whereas the stabilizing tempo primarily is gradual and low. In contrast to a common assumption, no significant correlation was found between the rates of morphological evolution and the temporal diversity of species. Key words: Coelacanth, Rates of morphological evolution, Evolutionary morphology, Cladistics, Phylogeny, Evolution, Paleontology, Tempo, Bradytely, Diversity.
S300	P. L. Forey	1991	Latimeria chalumnae and its pedigree	Environmental Biology of Fishes	32		75-97	10.1007/bf00007446			Latimeria is the product of a long coelacanth lineage, usually viewed as having changed very little. In this paper a classification of better known coelacanth genera is proposed based on a cladistic computer analysis of 56 morphological characters. Biometrical data are then matched with the classification to explore the possibility of identifying subtle change. It is concluded that throughout coelacanth history there have been changes in the structure of the vertebral column involving an overall increase in the number of vertebral elements, and a consequent crowding of these elements within the abdominal region. These changes may be associated with increasing lobation of the second dorsal and anal fins. In the skull, parameters involving the intracranial joint have also changed in such a way that the anterior part of the skull has lengthened in relation to the posterior part and this may be associated with an increase in length of the basicranial muscle. Coelacanth, Evolution, Phylogeny, Cladistics, Classification, Intracranial joint, Fins, Vertebral column.
S2149	K. Lohtander;H. L. Pasonen;M. K. Aalto;T. Palva;A. Pappinen;J. Rikkinen	2008	Phylogeny of chitinases and implications for estimating horizontal gene transfer from chitinase transgenic silver birch (Betula pendula)	Environmental Biosafety Research							Chitinases are hydrolytic enzymes that have been employed in biotechnology in the attempts to increase plants‚ resistance against fungal pathogens. Genetically modified plants have given rise to concerns of the spreading of transgenes into environment through vertical or horizontal gene transfer (HGT). In this study, chitinase-like sequences from silver birch (Betula pendula) EST-libraries were identified and their phylogenetic relationships to other chitinases were studied. Phylogenetic analyses were used to estimate the frequency of historical gene transfer events of chitinase genes between plants and other organisms, and the usefulness of phylogenetic analyses as a source of information for the risk assessment of transgenic silver birch carrying a sugar beet chitinase IV gene was evaluated. Thirteen partial chitinase-like sequences, with an approximate length of 600 bp, were obtained from the EST-libraries. The sequences belonged to five chitinase classes. Some bacterial chitinases from Streptomyces and Burkholderia, as well as a chitinase from an oomycete Phytophtora infestans grouped together with the class IV chitinases of plants, supporting the hypothesis that some class IV chitinases in bacteria and Phytophtora have evolved from plant chitinases via horizontal gene transfer. According to our analyses, HGT of a chitinase IV gene from eukaryotes to bacteria has occurred presumably only once. Based on this, the likelihood for the HGT of chitinase IV gene from transgenic birch to other organisms is expected to be extremely low. However, as the risk is the function of both the likelihood and consequence, the effects of the rare HGT event(s) will finally determine the level of the risk.
S1356	B. Areekul;M. Mori;A. Zaldivar-Riveron;D. L. J. Quicke	2005	Molecular and morphological phylogeny of the parasitic wasp genus Yelicones Cameron (Braconidae: Rogadinae)	European Journal of Entomology	102		617-624				Phylogenetic relationships of the braconid wasp genus Yelicones Cameron are studied using the D2-D3 region of the nuclear 28S rRNA gene, both alone and simultaneously with morphology. The results support a morphology-based phylogeny, presented elsewhere, with Yelicones being divided into two major groups corresponding to the New and Old World faunas. The African and Asian species largely form separate clades except for Yelicones wui Chen & He from China which is associated with the Afrotropical species. Potential molecular synapomorphies are illustrated.
S712	T. Friedl;C. J. O'Kelly	2002	Phylogenetic relationships of green algae assigned to the genus Planophila (Chlorophyta): evidence from 18S rDNA sequence data and ultrastructure	European Journal of Phycology	37	3	373-384	10.1017/S0967026202003712		Chlorella; Chlorophyceae; ﬂagellar apparatus; 18S rRNA phylogeny; Planophila; Prasiola; Stichococcus; Trebouxiophyceae; ultrastructure; Ulvophyceae	Phylogenetic analyses, based upon nuclear small-subunit ribosomal RNA gene sequences, of four ‘chlorosarcinoid’ species referred to Planophila Gerneck show that the genus is polyphyletic. The type species, P. laetevirens Gerneck, is closely related to species in the Ulotrichales, Ulvophyceae. The monotypic sarcinoid genus Pseudendocloniopsis is the closest relative of Planophila; the two genera represent the addition of a new morphological type to the Ulotrichales. Planophila microcystis (Dangeard) Kornmann & Sahling forms a clade at the base of the Ulvophyceae with Oltmannsiellopsis, and thus belongs to the Oltmannsiellopsidales. This result is also supported by the Oltmannsiellopsis-like ultrastructure of P. microcystis zoospores. Planophila sp. B from Antarctica, which has Trebouxia-like pyrenoid structure, is a trebouxiophyte closely related to Chlorella-like unicellular coccoids, Stichococcus bacillaris and Prasiola species. This is the first robustly supported molecular phylogenetic analysis that places Prasiola in the Trebouxiophyceae. As shown previously, P. terrestris Groover & Hofstetter belongs to the Chaetopeltidales, Chlorophyceae. Dangemannia gen. nov. (type species: D. microcystis (Dangeard) comb. nov.), Floydiella gen. nov. (type species: F. terrestris (Groover & Hofstetter) comb. nov.) and Pabia gen. nov. (type: P. signiensis sp. nov.) are proposed.
S1376	H. E. O'Brien;J. Miadlikowska;F. Lutzoni	2005	Assessing host specialization in symbiotic cyanobacteria associated with four closely related species of the lichen fungus Peltigera	European Journal of Phycology							Heterocystous cyanobacteria form symbiotic associations with a wide range of plant and fungal hosts. We used a molecular phylogenetic approach to investigate the degree of host specialization of cyanobacteria associated with four closely related species of the lichenized fungus Peltigera and to compare these strains to other symbiotic cyanobacteria. We conducted phylogenetic analyses on 16S, rbcLX, and trnL sequences from cyanobacteria associated with multiple specimens of each lichen species and from symbionts of other fungi and plants, as well as from free-living strains of Nostoc and related genera of cyanobacteria. The genus Nostoc comprises two divergent lineages, but symbiotic strains occur primarily within a single monophyletic lineage that also included free-living representatives. Cyanobacteria from the same lichen species were often more closely related to strains from other species or to plant symbionts or free-living strains than to each other. These results indicate that host specialization is low for the genus Nostoc, and suggest that opportunities for coevolution with its partners may be rare.
S1609	S. M. Lin;W. A. Nelson;M. H. Hommersand	2006	An assessment of Haraldiophyllum (Delesseriaceae, Rhodophyta), including H. crispatum (J. D. Hooker et Harvey) comb. nov. from New Zealand based on rbcL and LSU sequence analysis and morphological evidence	European Journal of Phycology							Over thirty species from around the world are currently placed in Myriogramme, very few of which have been compared with the type species, M. livida from southern South America and the Falkland Islands. An investigation of two of these, Myriogramme crispata and M. denticulata from New Zealand, demonstrates that they comprise a single morphologically variable species, Haraldiophyllum crispatum (J.D. Hooker et Harvey) comb. nov., that is separable from Myriogramme. A morphological and molecular study of the New Zealand species together with the type species of Haraldiophyllum, H. bonnemaisonii, from the British Isles, establishes that the genus is correctly placed in the tribe Myriogrammeae. It differs from Myriogramme in having sympodially developed solitary terminal carposporangia rather than carposporangia borne in chains and sterile-group cells that fuse during carposporophyte development rather than remaining separate. RbcL analyses revealed that a range of forms of H. crispatum from the North, South and Stewart Islands were identical and that H. crispatum was sister to H. bonnemaisonii. No relationship between Haraldiophyllum and Myriogramme was found in the rbcL analyses; however, a sister relationship between the two was moderately supported in maximum parsimony analysis of the Large subunit rDNA (LSU) and was strongly supported in a Bayesian analysis. Our studies indicate that many species with similar morphologies placed in Haraldiophyllum, Myriogramme and Nitophyllum require reinvestigation.
S1984	S. Heesch;A. F. Peters;J. E. Broom;C. L. Hurd	2008	Affiliation of the parasite Herpodiscus durvillaeae (Phaeophyceae) with the Sphacelariales based on DNA sequence comparisons and morphological observations	European Journal of Phycology							The phylogenetic affinities of the brown alga Herpodiscus durvillaeae (Lindauer) South, an obligate parasite of Durvillaea antarctica (Chamisso) Hariot (Fucales, Phaeophyceae) endemic to New Zealand, were analysed using combined partial nuclear encoded ribosomal DNA and plastid encoded RuBisCO gene sequences. Results from phylogenetic analyses place this species within the order Sphacelariales. Molecular data were supported by two morphological features characteristic for the Sphacelariales sensu stricto: the presence of apical cells and the transitory blackening of the cell wall with sodium hypochlorite solution ('Eau de Javel'). However, the strongly heteromorphic life-history distinguishes H. durvillaeae from all other members of the Sphacelariales indicating that a comprehensive revision of the order Sphacelariales is required.
S2455	E. C. Theriot;J. J. Cannone;R. R. Gutell;A. J. Alverson	2009	The limits of nuclear-encoded SSU rDNA for resolving the diatom phylogeny	European Journal of Phycology	44	3	277-290	10.1080/09670260902749159			A recent reclassification of diatoms based on phylogenies recovered using the nuclear-encoded small subunit ribosomal RNA (SSU rRNA) gene contains three major classes, Coscinodiscophyceae, Mediophyceae and the Bacillariophyceae (the CMB hypothesis). We evaluated this with a sequence alignment of 1336 protist and heterokont algae SSU rRNAs, which includes 673 diatoms. Sequences were aligned to maintain structural elements conserved within this dataset. Parsimony analysis rejected the CMB hypothesis, albeit weakly. Morphological data are also incongruent with this recent CMB hypothesis of three diatom clades. We also re-analysed a recently published dataset that purports to support the CMB hypothesis. Our re-analysis found that the original analysis had not converged on the true bipartition posterior probability distribution, and rejected the CMB hypothesis. Thus we conclude that a reclassification of the evolutionary relationships of the diatoms according to the CMB hypothesis is premature.
S231	J. Cracraft	1986	Origin and evolution of continental biotas: Speciation and historical congruence within the Australian avifauna	Evolution	40		977-996				Factors governing the origin and evolution of continental biotas were investigated using an analysis of speciation patterns within the Australian avifauna. Phylogenetic relationships within seven lineages of birds were analyzed by numerical cladistic techniques applied to data sets of morphological characters. These relationships revealed extensive congruence among the spatial and temporal histories of lineages whose species are endemic to common areas of endemism. A general hypothesis is constructed to explain this- congruence in which widespread biotas are postulated to have been partitioned into areas of endemism by the origin of geomorphological and/or ecological-climatic barriers. Congruence in these phylogenetic patterns of differentiation suggests the following historical pattern of interrelationships for areas of endemism along the northern and eastern coasts of Australia: (Kimberley Plateau + Arnhem Land) + ([New Guinea + Cape York Peninsula] + [Atherton Plateau + Eastern Coastal Rainforest]). Likewise, this study indicates that the arid interior avifauna was segregated into two closely related biotas (Eastern and Western Desert biotas) by the Eyrean Barrier. These biotas are, in turn, related to a more mesic avifauna that was itself subdivided into areas of endemism located in the Southwest and Southeast corners of the continent.
S11x5x95c19c35c30	K. Bremer	1988	The limits of amino acid sequence data in angiosperm phylogenetic reconstruction	Evolution	42		795-803				Amino acid sequence data are available for ribulose biphosphate carboxylase, plastocyanin, cytochrome c, and ferredoxin for a number of angiosperm families. Cladistic analysis of the data, including evaluation of all equally or almost equally parsimonious cladograms, shows that much homoplasy (parallelisms and reversals) is present and that few or no well supported monophyletic groups of families can be demonstrated. In one analysis of nine angiosperm families and 40 variable amino acid positions from three proteins, the most parsimonious cladograms were 151 steps long and contained 63 parallelisms and reversals (consistency index = 0.583). In another analysis of six families and 53 variable amino acid positions from four proteins, the most parsimonious cladogram was 161 steps long and contained 50 parallelisms and reversals (consistency index = 0.689). Single changes in both data matrices could yield most parsimonious cladograms with quite different topologies and without common monophyletic groups. Presently, amino acid sequence data are not comprehensive enough for phylogenetic reconstruction among angiosperms. More informative positions are needed, either from sequencing longer parts of the proteins or from sequencing more proteins from the same taxa.
S2x3x96c17c06c51	D. E. Soltis;P. S. Soltis;B. D. Ness	1989	Chloroplast-DNA variation and multiple origins of autopolyploidy in Heuchera micranthia (Saxifragaceae)	Evolution	43		650-656				This article appears in the Notes and Comments section and has no abstract.
S2x7x96c15c50c04	R. K. Jansen;K. E. Holsinger;H. J. Michaels;J. D. Palmer	1990	Phylogenetic analysis of chloroplast DNA restriction site data at higher taxonomic levels: an example from the Asteraceae	Evolution	44		2089-2105				Chloroplast DNA variation was examined among 57 genera of Asteraceae representing 15 currently recognized tribes. Complete cleavage maps were constructed for 11 six-base pair restriction enzymes, and a total of 927 cleavage site differences was detected, 328 of which are phylogenetically informative. The data were used to construct phylogenetic trees using both Wagner and Dollo parsimony and the resulting monophyletic groups were evaluated statistically using the bootstrap method. The level of homoplasy in the restriction site data is 54-56% (excluding autapomorphies), most of which is due to parallel site losses. The most parsimonious trees generated by both parsimony methods have nearly identical topologies at lower taxonomic levels, but differ in subfamilial circumscriptions and tribal groupings. Dollo parsimony provides support for the monophyly of two subfamilies, the Lactucoideae (excluding the Barnadesiinae) and Asteroideae, but Wagner parsimony supports the monophyly of the Asteroideae only. This incongruence is due to different assumptions of the two parsimony methods about relative rates of parallel site gains and losses. After eliminating the six most rapidly changing restriction sites or performing successive approximation, Wagner parsimony produces trees with the same subfamilial groupings as the Dollo trees. We conclude that the Dollo tree with two monophyletic subfamilies is the best estimate of phylogenetic relationships in the Asteraceae because this method more accurately reflects the evolution of restriction sites. We also demonstrate that in spite of high levels of homoplasy in chloroplast DNA restriction site data at these higher taxonomic levels, it is possible to make statistically supported estimates of phylogenetic relationships.
S333	V. Douris;R. A. D. Cameron;G. C. Rodakis;R. Lecanidou	1998	Mitochondrial phylogeography of the land snail Albinaria in Crete: Long-term geological and short-term vicariance effects	Evolution	52	1	116-125		http://www.jstor.org/stable/2410926	Albinaria; Crete; land snails; mitochondrial ribosomal RNA; molecular systematics; paleogeography; phylogeography	The land snail genus Albinaria exhibits an extreme degree of morphological differentiation in Greece, especially in the island of Crete. Twenty-six representatives of 17 nominal species and a suspected hybrid were examined by sequence analysis of a PCR-amplified mitochondrial DNA fragment of the large rRNA subunit gene. Maximum parsimony and neighbor-joining phylogenetic analyses demonstrate a complex pattern of speciation and differentiation and suggest that Albinaria species from Crete belong to at least three distinct monophyletic groups, which, however, are not monophyletic with reference to the genus as a whole. There is considerable variation of genetic distance within and among species and groups. The revealed phylogenetic relations do not correlate well with current taxonomy, but exhibit biogeographical coherence. Certain small- and large-scale vicariance events can be traced, although dispersal and parapatric speciation may also be present. Our analysis suggests that there was an early and rapid differentiation of Albinaria groups across the whole of the range followed by local speciation events within confined geographical areas.
S587	R. H. Cruickshank;R. H. Thomas	1999	Evolution of haplodiploidy in dermanyssine mites (Acari: Mesostigmata)	Evolution	53	6	1796-1803		http://www.jstor.org/stable/2640441	Acari; arrhenotoky; genetic systems; haplodiploidy; molecular systematics; phylogenetics; pseudoarrhenotoky	Haplodiploidy, a widespread phenomenon in which males are haploid and females are diploid, can be caused by a number of different underlying genetic systems. In the most common of these, arrhenotoky, males arise from unfertilized eggs, whereas females arise from fertilized eggs. In another system, pseudoarrhenotoky, males arise from fertilized eggs, but they eliminate the paternal genome at some point prior to spermatogenesis, with the consequence that they do not pass this genome to their offspring. In 1931 Schrader and Hughes-Schrader suggested that arrhenotoky arises through a series of stages involving pseudoarrhenotokous systems such as those found in many scale insects (Homoptera: Coccoidea), however, their hypothesis has been largely ignored. We have used a phylogenetic analysis of 751 base pairs of 28S rDNA from a group of mites (Mesostigmata: Dermanyssina) that contains arrhenotokous, pseudoarrhenotokous, and ancestrally diplodiploid members to test this hypothesis. Neighbor-joining, maximum-parsimony, and maximum-likelihood methods all indicate that the arrhenotokous members of this group form a clade that arose from a pseudoarrhenotokous ancestor, rather than directly from a diplodiploid one. This provides unequivocal support for the hypothesis of Schrader and Hughes-Schrader. The wider implications of this result for the evolution of uniparental genetic systems are discussed.
S534	D. K. Aanen;T. W. Kuyper;T. H. M. Mes;R. F. Hoekstra	2000	The evolution of reproductive isolation in the ectomycorrhizal Hebeloma crustuliniforme aggregate (Basidiomycetes) in northwestern Europe: A phylogenetic approach	Evolution	54	4	1192-1206	10.1554/0014-3820(2000)054[1192:TEORII]2.0.CO;2		Basidiomycetes; ectomycorrhiza; Hebeloma crustuliniforme; reproductive isolation; sexual intercompatibility; speciation	In order to reconstruct the evolution of reproductive isolation in the ectomycorrhizal Hebeloma crustuliniforme aggregate (Basidiomycetes), phylogenetic relationships were determined between strains that belong to a clade, consisting of nine InterCompatibility Groups (ICGs, biological species). Four of these nine ICGs are partially compatible, and belong to the H. crustuliniforme aggregate. This partial compatibility is organized hierarchically, with an intermediate level of compatibility between ICGs 3 and 4, and very limited compatibility between 2 and 3/4 and between 1 and 2. One strain is compatible with both ICGs 3 and 4. Both a nuclear phylogeny based on ribosomal IGS sequence data, and a mitochondrial phylogeny, based on a group-I intron located in the large subunit ribosomal RNA gene (LrRNA), were reconstructed. The level of compatibility was compared with the phylogenetic history of individuals belonging to this clade. For ICGs 2, 3 and 4 the level of incompatibility is positively correlated with the age of the most recent common ancestor. ICG 1 has a different position in the nuclear and the mitochondrial phylogenies. A possible explanation is that it has a hybrid origin, with different mitochondrial and nuclear donors. Overall, these results support the class of 'divergence-first' models of the evolution of (partial) incompatibility. However, we found evidence for genetic exchange between divergent populations as well. No clear pattern of ecological or geographical differentiation between ICGs was evident.
S572	S. E. Masta	2000	Phylogeography of the jumping spider Habronattus pugillis (Araneae: Salticidae): Recent vicariance of sky island populations?	Evolution	54	5	1699-1711	10.1111/j.0014-3820.2000.tb00714.x		Habronattus pugillis; lineage sorting; migration; mitochondrial DNA; molecular clock; phylogeography; sky islands.	In island systems with diverging populations, the history of island formation and genealogical estimates of divergence dates can be mutually informative. In the "sky islands" of southeastern Arizona, climate-induced contraction of woodlands appears to have fragmented populations of woodland-dwelling species onto disjunct mountain ranges. Montane populations of the jumping spider, Habronattus pugillis, display striking amounts of phenotypic divergence among ranges. Paleoclimatic estimates date woodland fragmentation at approximately 10,000 years ago, suggesting that phenotypic divergence has been extraordinarily rapid in these spiders. This phylogeographic study of populations of H. pugillis attempts to clarify the species' history of isolation and divergence and to address the suitability of available paleoclimatic data for dating divergences among populations of the region's woodland-dwelling organisms. Mitochondrial sequence data of spiders from 13 mountain ranges was used to reconstruct genealogical relationships. Gene trees show that small mountain ranges tend to have populations whose sequences form monophyletic groups, whereas larger ranges do not. Paraphyly among genes from larger ranges could result from either recent migration or incomplete lineage sorting. I use phylogenetic and geographic information to test these alternatives, and conclude that incomplete lineage sorting best explains the observed paraphyly. Gene trees are concordant with some of the predictions of vegetation history generated by examination of topography. Dates estimated for divergence of populations vary from 30,000 years to more than 2 million years ago, suggesting multiple vicariance events that are older than would be inferred from paleoclimatic studies. These findings illustrate that use of any single paleontological dataset to calibrate molecular clocks can potentially greatly underestimate actual divergence times. 
S648	F. Ronquist;J. Liljeblad	2001	Evolution of the gall wasp-host plant association	Evolution	55	12	2503-2522	10.1554/0014-3820(2001)055[2503:EOTGWH]2.0.CO;2		Coevolution; galls; host shifts; insect-plant relationships; parasitism; phylogeny	Gall wasps, or cynipids, form the second largest radiation of galling insects with more than 1300 described species. According to current views, the first cynipids were phytophagous and developed in herb stems of the Asteraceae without modifying plant growth or development. The first galls were supposedly multichambered stem swellings, and subsequent trends involved increase in gall complexity and reduction in the number of larval chambers. Gall wasps also have many of the features believed to be characteristic for phytophagous insects radiating in parallel with their host plants. We tested these hypotheses by mapping characters onto a recent estimate of higher cynipid relationships from a morphology-based analysis of exemplar taxa, controlling for phylogenetic uncertainty using bootstrapping. Characters were also mapped onto a metatree including all gall wasps, assembled from phylogenetic analyses as well as recent classifications. The results contradict many of the current hypotheses. The first cynipids with extant descendants were not Asteraceae stem feeders but induced distinct single-chambered galls in reproductive organs of herbaceous Papaveraceae, or possibly Lamiaceae. There has been a general trend toward more complex galls but the herb-stem feeders evolved from ancestors inducing distinct galls and their larval chambers are best understood as cryptic galls. Woody hosts have been colonized only three times, making the apparently irreversible transition from herbs to woody hosts one of the most conservative features of the gall wasp–host plant association. The evolution of host plant preferences is characterized by colonization of preexisting host-plant lineages rather than by parallel cladogenesis. Cynipids are mono- or oligophagous and host-plant choice is strongly phylogenetically conserved. Yet, the few major host shifts have involved remarkably distantly related plants. Many shifts have been onto plant species already exploited by other gall wasps, suggesting that interspecific parasitism among cynipids facilitates colonization of novel host plants.
S678	S. Malcomber	2002	Phylogeny of Gaertnera Lam. (Rubiaceae) based on multiple DNA markers: Evidence of a rapid radiation in a widespread morphologically diverse genus	Evolution	56	1	42-57	10.1554/0014-3820(2002)056[0042:POGLRB]2.0.CO;2		Biogeography; lineage diversification; Madagascar; Mauritius; molecular clock; Southeast Asia; Sri Lanka	Phylogenetic relationships among 28 of the 68 species of the paleotropical genus Gaertnera (Rubiaceae) and two related genera were inferred from nucleotide sequence variation in four nuclear DNA (nDNA) markers: the internal transcribed spacers of nuclear rDNA (ITS), the large and small copies of phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase (PepC-large and PepC-small), and triose phosphate isomerase (Tpi). Phylogenetic analysis of the combined nDNA dataset suggested that Gaertnera is monophyletic, but genetic variation among species was insufficient to reconstruct well-supported relationships within the genus. This was counter to expectations based on the very distinct morphologies and widespread distribution of the genus (West Africa to Sulawesi). Molecular clock analyses suggested variable dates of origin for Gaertnera depending upon the calibration method used. The most plausible calibration implies that Gaertnera migrated to Africa during the early Tertiary, possibly via a boreotropical land bridge and suggests that Gaertnera started to radiate 5.21 ± 0.14 million years ago. This implies that range expansion in the group has occurred via a number of long-distance dispersal events rather than vicariance. The molecular clock estimate in turn estimated an unusually rapid lineage diversification rate within the radiation of 0.717–0.832 species/million years, comparable to those estimated for radiations on oceanic islands. Although low interspecific competition levels may have contributed to the diversification of Gaertnera on Mauritius, the mechanisms driving the rapid radiation of the group in other parts of its range remain elusive.
S1286	T. B. Patterson;T. J. Givnish	2002	Phylogeny, concerted convergence, and phylogenetic niche conservatism in the core Liliales: insights from rbcL and ndhF sequence data	Evolution	56	2	233-252	10.1111/j.0014-3820.2002.tb01334.x		Calochortaceae; concerted plesiomorphy; evolutionary trends; Liliaceae; phylogenetic inference; Uvulariaceae	Calochortus and the family Liliaceae s.s. have often been considered each other's closest relatives, based partly on their shared possession of bulbs, visually showy flowers, winged wind-dispersed seeds, and narrow parallel-veined leaves. We present a well-supported molecular phylogeny for these groups and their close relatives in the core Liliales, based on sequence variation in the chloroplast-encoded rbcL and ndhF genes. This analysis identifies Liliaceae s.s. as monophyletic, including one clade (((Lilium, Fritillaris, Nomocharis), Cardiocrinum), Notholirion) that appears to have diversified in the Himalayas roughly 12 million years ago and another ((Erythronium, Tulipa), (Gagea, Lloydia)) that arose in East Asia at about the same time. Medeola and Clintonia are sister to Liliaceae s.s. and bear rhizomes, inconspicuous flowers, fleshy animal-dispersed fruits, and broad reticulate-veined leaves. Calochortus is sister to Tricyrtis; both Tricyrtis and the neighboring clade of Prosartes-Streptopus-Scoliopus share several of the traits seen in Medeola-Clintonia. The core Liliales thus provide compelling examples of both concerted convergence and phy-logenetic niche conservatism. Invasion of open, seasonal habitats was accompanied by the independent evolution of bulbs, showy flowers, wind-dispersed seeds, and narrow parallel-veined leaves in Calochortus and Liliaceae s.s. Conversely, persistence in shady habitats was accompanied by the retention of rhizomes, inconspicuous flowers, animal-dispersed seeds, and broad reticulate-veined leaves in their sister groups. We advance arguments for the context-specific adaptive value of each of these traits, as well as evidence of parallel trends in other groups. Concerted convergence—convergence in several different traits, favored by the same shared set of ecological conditions, in two or more lineages—is an important evolutionary process that can mislead evolutionary analyses based solely on phenotypic variation.
S950	J. R. Dettman;D. J. Jacobson;J. W. Taylor	2003	A Multilocus Genealogical Approach to Phylogenetic Species Recognition in the Model Eukaryote Neurospora	Evolution							To critically examine the relationship between species recognized by phylogenetic and reproductive compatibility criteria, we applied phylogenetic species recognition (PSR) to the fungus in which biological species recognition (BSR) has been most comprehensively applied, the well-studied genus Neurospora. Four independent anonymous nuclear loci were characterized and sequenced from 147 individuals that were representative of all described outbreeding species of Neurospora. Based on genealogical concordance of multiple loci, we recognized a total of eight phylogenetic species, five of which corresponded with the five traditional biological species, and three of which were newly discovered. Not only were phylogenetic criteria superior to traditional reproductive compatibility criteria in revealing the full species diversity of Neurospora, but significant phylogenetic subdivisions were detected within some species. Despite previous suggestions of hybridization between N. crassa and N. intermedia in nature, and the fact that several putative hybrid individuals were included in this study, no molecular evidence in support of recent interspecific gene flow or the existence of true hybrids was observed. The sequence data from the four loci were combined and used to clarify how the species discovered by PSR were related. Although species-level clades were strongly supported, the phylogenetic relationships among species remained difficult to resolve, perhaps due to conflicting signals resulting from differential lineage sorting.
S987	H. P. Linder;P. Eldens;B. G. Briggs	2003	Contrasting patterns of radiation in African and Australian Restionaceae	Evolution	57						The floras of the mediterranean-climate areas of southern Africa and south-western Australia are remarkably species rich. Since the two areas are at similar latitudes and in similar positions on their respective continents, they have probably had similar Cenozoic climatic histories. Here we test the prediction that the evolution of the species richness in the two areas followed a similar temporal progression, by comparing the rates of lineage accumulation for African and Australian Restionaceae. Restionaceae (Poales) are typical and often dominant elements in the fynbos vegetation of the Cape Floristic Region of Southern Africa and the kwongan vegetation of the South Western Floristic Province of Western Australia. The phylogeny of the family was estimated from combined datasets for rbcL and trnLñF sequences and a large morphological dataset: these datasets are largely congruent. The monophyly of Restionaceae is supported, and a basal division into an African clade (c. 350 species) and an Australian clade (146 species) corroborated. There is also support for a futher subdivision of these two large sister-clades, but the terminal resolution within the African clade is very weak. Fossil pollen records provided a minimum age of the common ancestor of Australian and African Restionaceae as 64ñ71 Mya, and this date was used to calibrate a molecular clock. Since a molecular clock was rejected by a likelihood ratio test, rate changes between the lineages were smoothed using non-parametric rate smoothing. The rate-corrected ages were used to construct a plot of lineages through time. During the Palaeogene the Australian lineage diversity increased consistent with the predictions of the constant birthrate model, while the African lineage diversity showed a dramatic increase in diversification rate in the Miocene. Incomplete sampling obscures the patterns in the Neogene, but extending the trends to the modern extant diversity suggests that this acceleration in the speciation rate continued in the African clade, while the Australian clade retained a constant diversification rate. The substantial morphological and anatomical similarity between the African and Australian Restionaceae appear to preclude morphological innovations as possible explanations for the inter-continental differences. Most likely these differences are due to the greater geographical extent and ecological variation in temperate Australia than temperate Africa, which might have provided refugia for basal Restionaceae lineages, while the more mountainous terrain of southern Africa might have provided the selective regimes for a more rapid, recent speciation.
S921	C. Lopez-Vaamonde;H. C. J. Godfray;J. M. Cook	2003	Evolutionary dynamics of host plant utilisation in a genus of leaf-mining moths	Evolution	57	8	1804-1821				We used nuclear 28S rDNA sequence data to estimate the phylogeny of 77 leaf-mining Phyllonorycter (Gracillariidae) moth species, including all 55 British species, feeding on 44 different plant genera. There was strong support for both the monophyly of Phyllonorycter and the placement of the genus Cameraria as its sister group. Host plant use was mapped onto the moth phylogeny and investigated statistically in several ways. First, we show that the estimated level of co-speciation between leafminers and their host plants is not greater than expected by chance, despite the physical intimacy of the association. Nevertheless, the pattern of host plant use is far from random, with closely related Phyllonorycter species generally feeding on closely related plants. However, while Phyllonorycter species from a given host plant tend to form distinct clades, there is also statistical support for multiple independent colonisations of some host plant taxa (e.g. the order Rosales and the genus Corylus). Despite numerous host shifts, most Phyllonorycter species feed on trees and the few species that attack shrubs or herbs have mostly acquired these habits independently. There is also limited evidence that host shifts to herbs are more likely from shrubs than from trees. Similarly, most species mine the lower surface of leaves but the few upper surface miners have each evolved the habit independently. Consequently, these shifts to new adaptive zones have not led to substantial radiations.
S806	S. F. McDaniel;A. J. Shaw	2003	Phylogeographic structure and cryptic speciation in the trans-Antarctic moss, Pyrrhobryum mnioides	Evolution	57	2	205-215				Many bryophyte species have distributions that span multiple continents. The hypotheses historically advanced to explain such distributions rely on either long-distance spore dispersal or slow rates of morphological evolution following ancient continental vicariance events. We use phylogenetic analyses of DNA sequence variation at three chloroplast loci (atpB-rbcL spacer, rps4 gene, and trnL intron and 3? spacer) to examine these two hypotheses in the trans-Antarctic moss Pyrrhobryum mnioides. We find: 1) reciprocal monophyly of Australasian and South American populations, indicating a lack of intercontinental dispersal, 2) shared haplotypes between Australia and New Zealand, suggesting recent or ongoing migration across the Tasman Sea, and 3) reciprocal monophyly among Patagonian and Neotropical populations, suggesting no recent migration along the Andes. These results corroborate experimental work suggesting that spore features may be critical determinants of species range(van Zanten 1978). We use the mid-Miocene development of the Atacama Desert, 14 MYA, to calibrate a molecular clock for the tree. The age of the trans-Antarctic disjunction is estimated to be 80 MYA, consistent with Gondwanan vicariance, making it among the most ancient documented cases of cryptic speciation. These data are in accord with niche conservatism, but whether the morphological stasis is a product of stabilizing selection or phylogenetic constraint is unknown.
S1023	D. M. Percy	2003	Radiation, diversity and host plant interactions among island and continental legume-feeding psyllids	Evolution	57		2540-2556				Island archipelagos and insect-plant associations have both independently provided many useful systems for evolutionary study. The arytainine psyllid (Sternorrhyncha: Hemiptera) radiation on broom (Fabaceae: Genisteae) in the Canary Island archipelago provides a discrete system for examining the speciation of highly host specific phytophagous insects in an island context. Phylogenetic reconstructions based on three datasets (adult and nymph morphological characters, and two mitochondrial DNA regions: part of the small subunit rRNA, and part of cytochrome oxidase I, cytochrome oxidase II and the intervening tRNA leucine) are generally consistent. The combined molecular tree provides a well supported estimate of psyllid relationships and shows that there have been several colonizations of the Macaronesian islands but that only one has resulted in a significant radiation. Psyllid diversification has apparently been constrained by the presence of suitable host groups within the Genistoid legumes, and the diversity, distribution and abundance of those groups. The phylogeny, by indicating pairs of sister species, allows putative mechanisms of speciation to be assessed. The most common conditions associated with psyllid speciation are geographical allopatry with a host switch to closely related hosts (six examples), or geographical allopatry on the same host (four examples). Where allopatric speciation involves a host switch these have all been to related hosts. There is some evidence that switches between unrelated host plants may be more likely in sympatry. The only sister pairs that are sympatric (Arytainilla cytisi and telonicola, and the putative host races of Arytinnis modica) occur on unrelated hosts, which may be a necessary condition for sympatric speciation in these insects. Where several unrelated psyllids share the same host, resources appear to be partitioned by ecological specialization in psyllids and differing psyllid phenology.
S1024	D. M. Percy	2003	Radiation, diversity and host plant interactions among island and continental legume-feeding psyllids	Evolution	57		2540-2556				Island archipelagos and insect-plant associations have both independently provided many useful systems for evolutionary study. The arytainine psyllid (Sternorrhyncha: Hemiptera) radiation on broom (Fabaceae: Genisteae) in the Canary Island archipelago provides a discrete system for examining the speciation of highly host specific phytophagous insects in an island context. Phylogenetic reconstructions based on three datasets (adult and nymph morphological characters, and two mitochondrial DNA regions: part of the small subunit rRNA, and part of cytochrome oxidase I, cytochrome oxidase II and the intervening tRNA leucine) are generally consistent. The combined molecular tree provides a well supported estimate of psyllid relationships and shows that there have been several colonizations of the Macaronesian islands but that only one has resulted in a significant radiation. Psyllid diversification has apparently been constrained by the presence of suitable host groups within the Genistoid legumes, and the diversity, distribution and abundance of those groups. The phylogeny, by indicating pairs of sister species, allows putative mechanisms of speciation to be assessed. The most common conditions associated with psyllid speciation are geographical allopatry with a host switch to closely related hosts (six examples), or geographical allopatry on the same host (four examples). Where allopatric speciation involves a host switch these have all been to related hosts. There is some evidence that switches between unrelated host plants may be more likely in sympatry. The only sister pairs that are sympatric (Arytainilla cytisi and telonicola, and the putative host races of Arytinnis modica) occur on unrelated hosts, which may be a necessary condition for sympatric speciation in these insects. Where several unrelated psyllids share the same host, resources appear to be partitioned by ecological specialization in psyllids and differing psyllid phenology.
S1357	B. G. Baldwin	2005	Origin of the serpentine-endemic herb Layia discoidea from the widespread L. glandulosa (Compositae)	Evolution	59		2473-2479				Phylogenetic analyses of nuclear rDNA sequences uphold Gottlieb et al.'s hypothesis that Layia discoidea, a morphologically unusual, serpentine-endemic herb of narrow distribution in central California, "budded off" recently (< 1 Ma) from a nearby lineage of the widespread L. glandulosa, which occurs on sandy soils across much of far western North America. Although L. discoidea and L. glandulosa retain complete interfertility, nuclear rDNA data for the two species are almost free of evolutionary noise, without evidence of gene flow between them; allopatric divergence of L. discoidea cannot be ruled out. Molecular data are consistent with an hypothesis of accelerated morphological evolution of L. discoidea and Gottlieb et al.'s suggestion that the closest relatives of L. discoidea are populations of L. glandulosa with yellow, rather than white, ray corollas, in accord with Clausen, Keck, and Hiesey's finding of a gene for yellow ray coloration in the ray-less L. discoidea.
S1544	E. A. Friar;L. M. Prince;E. H. Roalson;M. E. McGlaughlin;J. M. Cruse-Sanders;J. M. Porter;S. J. DeGroot	2006	Ecological speciation in the East Maui-endemic Dubautia (Asteraceae) species	Evolution							Adaptive diversification can be viewed as a balance between the conservative force of inter-population gene flow and selection for differential environments. In this paper, we examine ecological, morphological, and genetic differentiation in a small clade consisting of four East Maui endemic species of Dubautia: D. menziesii, D. platyphylla, D. reticulata, and D. waianapanapaensis, in the Hawaiian silversword alliance (Asteraceae). The East Maui clade is apparently recently derived (less than 1 MYA) and is geographically restricted, yet displays significant ecological and morphological differences. We used geographic data from historical herbarium specimens, measurements of plant architecture and leaf morphometrics, and measures of genetic differentiation in both microsatellite and nuclear coding loci to examine the correlation of different forms of divergence in this small species flock. We found overlap in large-scale geographic distributions, significant differentiation in most habitat factors, significant microsatellite differentiation and many shared alleles at nuclear coding loci suggesting on-going lineage sorting. Despite the presence of apparent hybrids in some populations, microsatellite variation is consistent with isolation among species. Using Mantel tests, we compared the direction and extent of diversification among different datasets, to determine if ecological/morphological divergence was correlated with genetic divergence. Correlations among different datasets showed that habitat was strongly correlated with plant architecture but not leaf morphology. Taken together, these results indicate that ecological and morphological diversification has driven genetic divergence at rapidly evolving microsatellite loci, while there is continuing lineage sorting at neutral sites in nuclear coding loci.
S1654	A. B. Munkacsi;S. Stoxen;G. May	2006	Domestication of maize, sorghum, and sugarcane did not drive the divergence of their smut pathogens	Evolution							We investigated two alternative hypotheses for the origin of crop pathogen species: that human-mediated agricultural practices drove the divergence of many crop plant pathogen species or that coevolutionary processes in natural populations of the crops' ancestors drove divergence of pathogen species. We distinguished between these two hypotheses by constructing a robust multigene phylogeny and estimating the dates of divergence among four, monophyletic species of smut fungi (Ustilago maydis, U. scitaminea, Sporisorium reilianum, S. sorghi) known to specifically infect maize, sorghum, sugarcane, and their wild ancestors. Without a fossil record for smut fungi, we calibrated the pathogen species' divergence times to their plant host divergence times. Specifically, a calibration date of 10,000 years was employed to test the hypothesis that the fungal species originated at the time of domestication of their current hosts and a calibration date of 50 million years was employed to test the hypothesis that the fungal species originated on wild ancestors of their domesticated hosts. Substitution rates at five protein coding genes were calculated and rates obtained for the 10,000 year calibration date were orders of magnitude faster than those commonly reported for eukaryotes, thus rejecting the hypothesis that these smut pathogen species diverged at the time of domestication. In contrast, substitution rates obtained for the 50 million year calibration were comparable to eukaryotic substitution rates. We used the 50 million year calibration to estimate divergence times of taxa in two datasets, one comprised solely of the focal species and one comprised of the focal species and additional related taxa. Both datasets indicate that all taxa diverged millions of years ago, strongly supporting the hypothesis that smut species diverged before the time of domestication and modern agriculture. Thus, smut species diverged in the ecological context of natural host plant and fungal populations.
S1617	R. T. Brumfield;S. V. Edwards	2007	Evolution into and out of the Andes: a Bayesian analysis of historical diversification in Thamnophilus antshrikes	Evolution	61	2	346-367	10.1111/j.1558-5646.2007.00039.x			The Andean uplift played important roles in the historical diversification of Neotropical organisms, both by producing new high-elevation habitats that could be colonized and by isolating organisms on either side of the mountains. Here, we present a molecular phylogeny of Thamnophlius antshrikes, a clade of 30 species whose collective distribution spans nearly the entirety of lowland habitats in tropical South America, the eastern slope foothills of the Andes, and the tepuis of northern South America. Our goal was to examine the role of the Andes in the diversification of lowland and foothill species. Using parsimony and Bayesian ancestral state reconstructions of a three-state distribution character (lowland-restricted, lowland-to-highland, highland-restricted), we found that the Andes were colonized two times independently and the tepuis once from lowland-restricted ancestors. Over the entire evolutionary history of Thamnophilus, the highest transition rates were between highland-restricted and lowland-to-highland distributions, with extremely low rates into or out of lowland-restricted distributions. This pattern suggests lowland-restricted distributions are limited not by physiological constraints, but by other forces, such as competition. These results highlight the need for additional comparative studies in elucidating processes associated with the colonization and differentiation of high-elevation habitats.
S1681	F. Forest;M. W. Chase;C. Persson;P. R. Crane;J. A. Hawkins	2007	The role of biotic and abiotic factors in the evolution of ant-dispersal in the milkwort family (Polygalaceae)	Evolution							A phylogenetic approach was taken to investigate the evolutionary history of seed appendages in the plant family Polygalaceae (Fabales) and determine which factors might be associated with evolution of the elaiosome through comparisons to abiotic (climate) and biotic (ant species number and abundance) timelines. Molecular data sets from three plastid regions representing 160 species were used to reconstruct a phylogenetic tree of the order Fabales, focusing on Polygalaceae. Bayesian dating methods were used to estimate the appearance in Polygalaceae of ant-dispersed elaiosomes, shown by likelihood optimizations to have a single origin in the family. Topology-based tests indicated a diversification rate shift associated with appearance of caruncular elaiosomes. We show that evolution of the caruncular elaiosome type currently associated with ant dispersal occurred 54.0-50.5 Ma. This is long after an estimated increase in ant lineages in the Late Cretaceous based on molecular studies, but broadly concomitant with increasing global temperatures culminating in the Late Paleocene-Early Eocene thermal maxima. These data suggest that although most ant major clades were present when elaiosomes appeared, the environmental significance of elaiosomes may have been an important factor in success of elaiosome-bearing lineages. Ecological abundance of ants is perhaps more important than lineage numbers in determining significance of ant dispersal. Thus, our observation that elaiosomes pre-date increased ecological abundance of ants inferred from amber deposits could be indicative of an initial abiotic environmental function.
S1894	S. M. Hedtke;K. Stanger-Hall;R. J. Baker;D. M. Hillis	2007	All-male asexuality: origin and maintenance of androgenesis in the Asian clam Corbicula	Evolution							Androgenesis is a rare form of asexual male reproduction found in disparate taxa across the Tree of Life. Phylogenetic analyses of mitochondrial genes suggest that androgenesis has arisen repeatedly in the Asian clam genus Corbicula. Two of these androgenetic species have been introduced to North America. Multiple lines of genetic evidence suggest that although nuclear recombination between these two species is rare, mitochondrial genome capture is a frequent consequence of androgenetic parasitism of heterospecific eggs. Egg parasitism may also rarely result in partial nuclear genome capture between closely related species of Corbicula, which provides a mechanism for the otherwise clonal species to avoid the deleterious effects of asexuality. Egg parasitism among congeners may explain why androgenesis has been maintained in Corbicula after fixation and has not yet led to population extinction. This mechanism also provides an explanation for the apparent multiple origins of androgenesis in Corbicula as seen on the mitochondrial DNA phylogeny. We suggest that a single androgenetic lineage may have repeatedly captured mitochondrial genomes (as well as portions of nuclear genomes) from various sexual species, resulting in several distinct androgenetic species with distantly related mtDNA genomes and divergent morphologies.
S1716	C. R. Linnen;B. D. Farrell	2007	Mito-nuclear discordance is caused by rampant mitochondrial introgression in Neodiprion (Hymenoptera: Diprionidae) sawflies	Evolution							We investigate the pervasiveness of hybridization and mitochondrial introgression in Neodiprion Rohwer (Hymenoptera; Diprionidae), a Holarctic genus of conifer-feeding sawflies. A phylogenetic analysis of the lecontei species group revealed extensive discordance between a contiguous mitochondrial region spanning three genes (COI, tRNA-leucine, and COII) and three nuclear loci (EF1a, CAD, and an anonymous nuclear locus). Bayesian tests of monophyly and Shimodaira-Hasegawa tests of topological congruence were consistent with mitochondrial introgression; however, these patterns could also be explained by lineage sorting (i.e., deep coalescence). Therefore, to explicitly test the mitochondrial introgression hypothesis, we used a novel application of coalescent-based Isolation with Migration (IM) models to measure interspecific gene flow at each locus. In support of our hypothesis, mitochondrial gene flow was consistently higher than nuclear gene flow across 120 pairwise species comparisons (p < 1x10-12). We combine phylogenetic and coalescent evidence to identify likely cases of recent and ancient introgression in Neodiprion, and based on these observations, we hypothesize that shared hosts and/or pheromones facilitate hybridization, while disparate abundances between hybridizing species promote mitochondrial introgression. Our results carry implications for phylogenetic analysis, and we advocate the separation of high and low gene flow regions to inform analyses of hybridization and speciational history, respectively.
S1881	J. A. McGuire;C. W. Linkem;M. S. Koo;D. W. Hucthison;A. K. Lappin;D. I. Orange;J. Lemos-Espinal;B. R. Riddle;J. R. Jaeger	2007	Mitochondrial Introgression and Incomplete Lineage Sorting Through Space and Time: Phylogenetics of Crotaphytid Lizards	Evolution							We investigate the roles of mitochondrial introgression and incomplete lineage sorting during the phylogenetic history of crotaphytid lizards. Our Bayesian phylogenetic estimate for Crotaphytidae is based on analysis of mitochondrial DNA sequence data for 408 individuals representing the 12 extant species of Crotaphytus and Gambelia. The mitochondrial phylogeny disagrees in several respects with a previously published morphological tree, as well as with conventional species designations, and we conclude that some of this disagreement stems from hybridization-mediated mitochondrial introgression, as well as from incomplete lineage sorting. Unidirectional introgression of Crotaphytus collaris (western collared lizard) mitochondria into C. reticulatus (reticulate collared lizard) populations in the Rio Grande Valley of Texas has resulted in replacement of ancestral C. reticulatus mitochondria over approximately two-thirds of the total range of the species, a linear distance of ~270 km. Introgression of C. collaris mitochondria into C. bicinctores (Great Basin collared lizard) populations in southwestern Arizona requires a more complex scenario because at least three temporally separated and superimposed introgression events appear to have occurred in this region. We propose an Œintrogression conveyor‚ model to explain this unique pattern of mitochondrial variation in this region. We show with ecological niche modeling that the predicted geographical ranges of C. collaris, C. bicinctores, and C. reticulatus during glacial maxima could have provided enhanced opportunities for past hybridization. Our analyses suggest that incomplete lineage sorting and/or introgression has further confounded the phylogenetic placements of additional species including C. nebrius, C. vestigium, C. insularis, C. grismeri, and perhaps G. copei. Despite many independent instances of interspecific hybridization among crotaphytid lizards, the species continue to maintain morphological and geographic cohesiveness throughout their ranges.
S1841	L. Revell;M. A. Johnson;J. A. S. Ii;J. J. Kolbe;J. B. Losos	2007	A phylogenetic test for adaptive convergence in rock-dwelling lizards	Evolution							Phenotypic similarity of species occupying similar habitats has long been taken as strong evidence of adaptation, but this approach implicitly assumes that similarity is evolutionarily derived. However, even derived similarities may not represent convergent adaptation if the similarities did not evolve as a result of the same selection pressures; an alternative possibility is that the similar features evolved for different reasons, but subsequently allowed the species to occupy the same habitat, in which case the convergence would be the result of exaptation. Many lizard lineages have evolved to occupy vertical rock surfaces, a habitat that places strong functional and ecological demands on lizards. We examined four clades in which species that use vertical rock surfaces exhibit long hindlimbs and flattened bodies. Morphological change on the phylogenetic branches leading to the rock-dwelling species in the four clades differed from change on other branches of the phylogeny; rock-dwelling lizards tended to have overall longer limbs and flatter heads. Examination of particular characters revealed several different patterns of evolutionary change. Rock-dwelling lizards exhibited similarities in head depth as a result of both adaptation and exaptation. Moreover, even though rock-dwelling species did not have longer limbs than non-rock-dwellers, limb length nonetheless evolved in the same direction relative to non-rock-dwelling sister taxa in most clades; clade-level differences in limb length, however, led to an overall lack of difference between rock- and non-rock-dwelling lizards. These results indicate that evolutionary change in the same direction in independent lineages does not necessarily produce convergence, and that the existence of similar advantageous structures among species independently occupying the same environment may not indicate adaptation.
S1705	R. P. Shefferson;D. L. Taylor;M. Weiss;S. Garnica;M. K. McCormick;S. Adams;H. M. Gray;J. W. McFarland;T. Kull;K. Tali;T. Yukawa;T. Kawahara;K. Miyoshi;Y. I. Lee	2007	The evolutionary history of mycorrhizal specificity among lady's slipper orchids	Evolution							Although coevolution is acknowledged to occur in nature, coevolutionary patterns in symbioses not involving species-to-species relationships are poorly understood. Mycorrhizal plants are thought to be too generalist to coevolve with their symbiotic fungi; yet some plants, including some orchids, exhibit strikingly narrow mycorrhizal specificity. Here, we assess the evolutionary history of mycorrhizal specificity in the lady's slipper orchid genus, Cypripedium. We sampled 90 populations of 15 taxa across three continents, using DNA methods to identify fungal symbionts and quantify mycorrhizal specificity. We assessed phylogenetic relationships among sampled Cypripedium taxa, onto which we mapped mycorrhizal specificity. Cypripedium taxa associated almost exclusively with fungi within family Tulasnellaceae. Ancestral specificity appears to have been narrow, followed by a broadening after the divergence of C. debile. Specificity then narrowed, resulting in strikingly narrow specificity in most of the taxa in this study, with no taxon re-widening to the same extant as basal members of the genus. Sympatric taxa generally associated with different sets of fungi, and most clades of Cypripedium-mycorrhizal fungi were found throughout much of the Northern Hemisphere, suggesting that these evolutionary patterns in specificity are not the result of biogeographic lack of opportunity to associate with potential partners. Mycorrhizal specificity in genus Cypripedium appears to be an evolvable trait, and associations with particular fungi are phylogenetically conserved.
S1957	N. Anthes;H. Schulenburg;N. K. Michiels	2008	Evolutionary links between reproductive morphology, ecology and mating behavior in opisthobranch gastropods	Evolution	62	4	900-916	10.1111/j.1558-5646.2008.00326.x			Sexual coevolution in morphological and behavioral traits has rarely been studied. Using phylogenetic analyses, we explore relationships between such traits based on a new molecular phylogeny of 33 opisthobranch taxa (Aglajidae and Gastropteridae). Our measurements include male and female reproductive anatomy, mating behavior, and spatial gregariousness. After phylogenetic correction, we found evidence for correlated evolution between male and female reproductive organs such as the size of the seminal fluid producing prostate gland and that of the sperm digesting bursa copulatrix. Our findings suggest that reproductive trait variation in these simultaneous hermaphrodites is mediated by sexual coevolution, where putatively manipulative male organs evolved in association with female organs involved in sperm selection. Furthermore, low gregariousness was associated with long, reciprocal copulations. We interpret this result as an adaptation to infrequent mate encounters, where it pays to mate longer with and presumably transfer more sperm to a rare partner. Several complex reproductive traits were repeatedly gained or lost across our phylogeny. This pattern is consistent with a scenario where sexual selection generates dynamic co-evolutionary cycles similar to those expected under sexual antagonism. We finally outline approaches for experimentally assessing the proposed functional links that underlie the evolutionary correlations revealed by our study.
S2176	N. Devos;A. Vanderpoorten	2009	Range disjunctions, speciation, and morphological transformation rates in the liverwort genus Leptoscyphus	Evolution	63	3	779-792	10.1111/j.1558-5646.2008.00567.x			Bryophytes and angiosperms exhibit similar intercontinental disjunct distributions that have traditionally been explained by continental drift. Such disjunct distributions are, however, typically observed at the species level in bryophytes, whereas they occur at much higher taxonomic level in angiosperms. The corollary of this observation is that morphological evolution in bryophytes is exceedingly slow. These hypotheses can now be explicitly tested with the advent of molecular dating. In this paper, we show that the trans-Atlantic disjunctions observed in the liverwort genus Leptoscyphus date back to 5.5 Myr, thus largely post-dating the opening of the South Atlantic. The temporal calibration of the phylogeny allows us to estimate for the first time the absolute timing of morphological evolution in bryophytes. The time frame necessary for shifts to occur between character states was estimated on average at ca. 4.05 ± 1.86 Myr. As opposed to the traditional view that bryophyte evolution has been triggered by episodic shifts in habitat conditions, our analyses furthermore suggest that morphological and molecular divergence gradually accumulated in the genus, in agreement with recent observations of regular accumulation of diversity in tropical liverworts.
S2219	S. Kautz;H. T. Lumbsch;P. S. Ward;M. Heil	2008	How to prevent cheating: A digestive specialization ties mutualistic plant-ants to their ant-plant partners	Evolution							Mutualisms often involve reciprocal adaptations of both partners. Acacia ant-plants that are defended by symbiotic Pseudomyrmex ants secrete sucrose-free extrafloral nectar, which is unattractive to generalists. We aimed to investigate whether this extrafloral nectar also can exclude exploiters, i.e. non-defending ant species. Mutualist workers discriminated against sucrose while exploiters and generalists preferred sucrose, since mutualist workers lacked the sucrose-cleaving enzyme invertase, which is present in workers of the other two groups. Sucrose uptake induced invertase activity in workers of parasites and generalists, but not mutualists, and in larvae of all species. Apparently, the mutualists loose invertase during their ontogeny. This adaptation seemingly ties the mutualists to their plant hosts, but it does not completely prevent the mutualism from exploitation. We therefore investigated whether the exploiters studied here are cheaters (i.e., have evolved from former mutualists) or parasites (exploiters with no evolutionary history as a mutualist). A molecular phylogeny demonstrates that the exploiter species studied here did not evolve from former mutualists, and no evidence for cheater species was found. We conclude that being specialized to their partner can prevent mutualists from becoming cheaters, while other mechanisms are required to stabilize a mutualism against the exploitation by parasites.
S2202	D. S. Moen;J. J. Wiens	2008	Phylogenetic evidence for competitively-driven divergence: body-size evolution in Caribbean treefrogs (Hylidae: Osteopilus)	Evolution							Understanding the role of competition in evolutionary divergence is a challenging problem in evolutionary biology, given that the species that have diverged the most due to competition may no longer compete today. However, phylogenetic analyses that show the repeated evolution of similar body-size extremes across communities may offer evidence of competitively driven divergence in the past. For example, most regional assemblages of treefrogs around the world contain similar body-size extremes (i.e., both very large and very small species), which appear to have evolved convergently many times. To better understand this global pattern, we studied body-size diversification within the small, endemic radiation of Caribbean treefrogs (Osteopilus), by combining community assembly models, phylogenetic and morphometric analyses, and analyses of rates of body-size evolution. Community assembly models, which have traditionally been used to test for past competition, indicate that body-size distributions of Caribbean species show more very large species and fewer small- and medium-sized species than expected based on mainland South American treefrogs from which the Caribbean species are derived. Phylogenetic analysis shows that the similar extremes of body sizes among species on Jamaica and Hispaniola have originated through parallel evolution on each island, rather than through dispersal. Furthermore, the rate of body-size evolution in Osteopilus is much higher than in the South American treefrogs from which it is derived, indicating that the body size extremes evolved through deterministic rather than random processes. Taken together, these results suggest that competition may have rapidly driven the diversification of body sizes in the Caribbean treefrogs to the extremes seen in older, more species-rich communities in South America and around the world. Convergence in body-size extremes across communities may be indicative of past competition in many different organisms.
S2125	C. Sedivy;C. J. Praz;A. Müller;A. Widmer;S. Dorn	2008	Patterns of host-plant choice in bees of the genus Chelostoma: the constraint hypothesis of host-range evolution in bees	Evolution							To trace the evolution of host-plant choice in bees of the genus Chelostoma (Megachilidae), we assessed the host plants of 35 Palearctic, North American and Indomalayan species by microscopically analyzing the pollen loads of 634 females and reconstructed their phylogenetic history based on four genes and a morphological data set, applying both parsimony and Bayesian methods. All species except two were found to be strict pollen specialists at the level of plant family or genus. These oligolectic species together exploit the flowers of eight different plant orders which are distributed among all major angiosperm lineages. Based on ancestral state reconstruction, we found that oligolecty is the ancestral state in Chelostoma and that the two pollen generalists evolved from oligolectic ancestors. The distinct pattern of host broadening in these two polylectic species, the highly conserved floral specializations within the different clades, the exploitation of unrelated hosts with a striking floral similarity as well as a recent report on larval performance on non-host pollen in two Chelostoma species clearly suggest that floral host choice is physiologically or neurologically constrained in bees of the genus Chelostoma. Based on this finding, we propose a new hypothesis on the evolution of host range in bees.
S1980	E. A. Tripp;P. S. Manos	2008	Is floral specialization an evolutionary dead-end? Pollination system transitions in Ruellia (Acanthaceae)	Evolution							Pollination systems frequently reflect adaptations to particular groups of pollinators. Such systems are indicative of evolutionary specialization and have been important in angiosperm diversification. We studied the evolution of pollination systems in the large genus Ruellia. Phylogenetic analyses, morphological ordinations, ancestral state reconstructions, and a character mapping simulation were conducted to reveal key patterns in the direction and lability of floral characters associated with pollination. We found significant floral morphological differences among species that were generally associated with different groups of floral visitors. Floral evolution has been highly labile and also directional. Some specialized systems such as hawkmoth or bat pollination are likely evolutionary dead-ends. In contrast, specialized pollination by hummingbirds is clearly not a dead-end. We found evidence for multiple reverse transitions from presumed ancestral hummingbird pollination to more derived bee or insect pollination. These repeated origins of insect pollination from hummingbird-pollinated ancestors have not evolved without historical baggage. Flowers of insect-pollinated species derived from hummingbird-pollinated ancestors are morphologically more similar to hummingbird flowers than they are to other more distantly related insect-pollinated flowers. Finally, some pollinator switches were concomitant with changes in floral morphology that are associated with those pollinators. These observations are consistent with the hypothesis that some transitions have been adaptive in the evolution of Ruellia.
S2013	K. C. Wollenberg;D. R. Vieites;A. V. d Meijden;D. C. Cannatella;M. Vences	2008	Patterns of endemism and species richness in Malagasy cophyline frogs support a key role of mountainous areas for speciation	Evolution							Cophyline narrow-mouthed frogs (Anura: Microhylidae) are a diverse endemic radiation of Madagascar. Cophylines contain a high proportion of range restricted species and constitute a good model system to understand patterns of evolutionary diversification in tropical ecosystems. We combine spatial and phylogenetic analyses for a near complete taxon sample to test competing explanations for patterns of species richness and endemism. Our reconstruction of the phylogeny of Malagasy cophylines indicates the presence of 22 new species and several instances of paraphyly. We found strong historical signal in current cophyline ranges indicating a high degree of spatial niche conservatism in clade diversification, with clades occurring in the North of Madagascar constituting the most derived in the phylogeny. We identified six positively correlated centers of species richness and endemism that can neither be explained by stochastic models such as elevational or latitudinal mid-domain effect, nor by low-elevation river catchments. Instead, the locations of these centers in areas spanning a high altitudinal range in combination with specific climatic parameters support a key role of mountainous areas for speciation of these anurans, although we can not exclude an influence of habitat loss due to human impact. High conservation priority is ascribed to these areas.
S2250	G. N. Stone;A. Hernandez-Lopez;J. A. Nicholls;E. d Pierro;J. Pujade-Villar;G. Melika;J. M. Cook	2009	Extreme host plant conservatism during at least 20 million years of host plant pursuit by oak gallwasps	Evolution	63	4	854-869	10.1111/j.1558-5646.2008.00604.x			Diversification of insect herbivores is often associated with coevolution between plant toxins and insect countermeasures, resulting in a specificity that restricts host plant shifts. Gall inducers, however, bypass plant toxins and the factors influencing host plant associations in these specialised herbivores remain unclear. We reconstructed the evolution of host plant associations in Western Palaearctic oak gallwasps (Cynipidae: Cynipini), a species-rich lineage of specialist herbivores on oak (Quercus). (i) Bayesian analyses of sequence data for 3 genes revealed extreme host plant conservatism, with inferred shifts between major oak lineages (sections Cerris and Quercus) closely matching the minimum required to explain observed diversity. It thus appears that the coevolutionary demands of gall induction constrain host plant shifts, both in cases of mutualism (e.g. fig wasps, yucca moths) and (oak gall wasps). (ii) Shifts between oak sections occurred independently in sexual and asexual generations of the gallwasp lifecycle, implying that these can evolve independently. (iii) Western Palaearctic gallwasps associated with sections Cerris and Quercus diverged at least 20 mya, prior to the arrival of oaks in the Western Palaearctic from Asia 5-7 mya. This implies an Asian origin for Western Palaearctic gallwasps, with independent westwards range expansion by multiple lineages.
S2531	J. A. Esselstyn;R. M. Timm;R. M. Brown	2009	Do geological or climatic processes drive speciation in dynamic archipelagos? The tempo and mode of diversification in Southeast Asian shrews	Evolution	63	10	2595-2610	10.1111/j.1558-5646.2009.00743.x			Geological and climatic processes potentially alter speciation rates by generating and modifying barriers to dispersal. In Southeast Asia, two processes have substantially altered the distribution of land. Volcanic uplift produced many new islands during the Miocene Pliocene and repeated sea level fluctuations during the Pleistocene resulted in intermittent land connections among islands. Each process represents a potential driver of diversification. We use a phylogenetic analysis of a group of Southeast Asian shrews (Crocidura) to examine geographic and temporal processes of diversification. In general, diversification has taken place in allopatry following the colonization of new areas. Sulawesi provides an exception, where we cannot reject within-island speciation for a clade of eight sympatric and syntopic species. We find only weak support for temporally declining diversification rates, implying that neither volcanic uplift nor sea level fluctuations had a strong effect on diversification rates. We suggest that dynamic archipelagos continually offer new opportunities for allopatric diversification, thereby sustaining high speciation rates over long periods of time, or Southeast Asian shrews represent an immature radiation on a density-dependent trajectory that has yet to fill geographic and ecological space.
S2413	J. Sauer;B. Hausdorf	2009	Sexual selection is involved in speciation in a land snail radiation on Crete	Evolution	63	10	2535-2546	10.1111/j.1558-5646.2009.00751.x			We investigated the importance of sexual selection in facilitating speciation in a land snail radiation on Crete. We used differences in the genitalia of the Cretan Xerocrassa species as potential indices of sexual selection. First, we rejected the hypothesis that differences in the genitalia of the Xerocrassa species can be explained by genetic drift using coalescent simulations based on a mitochondrial gene tree. Second, we showed that there is no evidence for the hypothesis that the differences in the genitalia can be explained by natural selection against hybrids under the assumption that this is more likely in geographically overlapping species pairs and clades. Thus, the differences in the genitalia evolved probably as a result of sexual selection. Finally, we showed that the evolution of differences in the length of the flagellum that forms the tail of the spermatophore is concentrated towards the tips of the tree indicating that it is involved in speciation. The tail of the spermatophore enables the sperm to escape from the female gametolytic organ. Thus, the radiation might have been triggered by sexual conflict or cryptic female choice. If speciation is facilitated by sexual selection, niches may remain conserved and non-adaptive radiation may result.
S2442	A. Corl;A. R. Davis;S. R. Kuchta;T. Comendant;B. Sinervo	2009	Alternative Mating Strategies and the Evolution of Sexual Size Dimorphism in the Side-Blotched lizard, Uta stansburiana: A Population-Level Comparative Analysis	Evolution	64	1	79-96	10.1111/j.1558-5646.2009.00791.x			Population-level comparative analyses can link microevolutionary processes within populations to macroevolutionary patterns of diversification. We used the comparative method to study the evolution of sexual size dimorphism (SSD) among populations of side-blotched lizards (Uta stansburiana). Uta stansburiana is polymorphic for different male mating and female life history strategies in some populations, but monomorphic in others. We tested whether intrasexual selection among males, fecundity selection on females, and presence of polymorphic strategies affected levels of SSD. We first resolved a phylogeny for 41 populations across the range of the species and documented substantial regional structure. Our intraspecific data had significant phylogenetic signal, and correcting for phylogeny using independent contrasts had large effects on our results. Polymorphic populations had male-biased SSD and changes in male body size, levels of tail breaks, and SSD consistent with the intrasexual selection hypothesis. Monomorphic populations had changes in female size, clutch size, and SSD consistent with the fecundity selection hypothesis. Fecundity selection is a likely cause of some monomorphic populations having no SSD or female-biased SSD. Our results suggest that changes in mating strategies are associated with phenotypic diversification and multiple evolutionary forces can shape SSD.
S2415	L. M. Valente;G. Reeves;J. Schnitzler;I. P. Mason;M. F. Fay;T. G. Rebelo;M. W. Chase;T. G. Barraclough	2010	Diversification of the African genus Protea in the Cape biodiversity hotspot and beyond: equal rates in different biomes	Evolution	64	3	745-760	10.1111/j.1558-5646.2009.00856.x			The Cape region of South Africa is an undisputed hotspot of flowering plant biodiversity. However, the reasons why levels of diversity and endemism are so high remain obscure. Here, we reconstructed phylogenetic relationships among species in the genus Protea, which has its center of species richness and endemism in the Cape, but also extends through tropical Africa as far as Eritrea and Angola. Contrary to previous views, the Cape is identified as the ancestral area for the radiation of the extant lineages: most species in sub-tropical and tropical Africa are derived from a single invasion of the region. Moreover, diversification rates have been similar within and outside the Cape region. Migration out of the Cape has opened up vast areas to those lineages, but they have not diversified as extensively at narrow spatial scales as lineages in the Cape. Therefore, higher net rates of diversification do not explain the high diversity and endemism of Protea in the Cape. Instead, understanding why the Cape is so diverse requires an explanation for how Cape species are able to diverge and persist at such small spatial scales.
S2521	S. Adolfsson;Y. Michalakis;D. Paczesniak;S. N. S. Bode;R. K. Butlin;D. K. Lamatsch;M. J. F. Martins;O. Schmit;J. Vandekerkhove;J. Jokela	2010	Evaluation of elevated ploidy and asexual reproduction as alternative explanations for geographic parthenogenesis in Eucypris virens ostracods	Evolution	64	4	986-997	10.1111/j.1558-5646.2009.00872.x			Transitions from sexual to asexual reproduction are often coupled with elevations in ploidy. As a consequence the importance of ploidy per se for the maintenance and spread of asexual populations is unclear. To examine the effects of ploidy and asexual reproduction as independent determinants of the success of asexual lineages, we sampled diploid sexual, diploid asexual and triploid asexual Eucypris virens ostracods across a European wide range. Applying nuclear and mitochondrial markers, we found that E. virens consists of genetically highly differentiated diploid sexual populations, to the extent that these sexual clades could be considered as cryptic species. All sexual populations were found in southern Europe and North Africa and we found that both diploid asexual and triploid asexual lineages have originated multiple times from several sexual lineages. Therefore, the asexual lineages show a wide variety of genetic backgrounds and very strong population genetic structure across the wide geographic range. Finally, we found that triploid, but not diploid, asexual clones dominate habitats in northern Europe. The limited distribution of diploid asexual lineages, despite their shared ancestry with triploid asexual lineages, strongly suggest that the wider geographic distribution of triploids is due to elevated ploidy rather than to asexuality.
S852	A. Rokas;N. King;J. Finnerty;S. B. Carroll	2003	Conflicting Phylogenetic Signals at the Base of the Metazoan Tree	Evolution & Development	5	4	346-359	10.1046/j.1525-142X.2003.03042.x			A phylogenetic framework is essential for understanding the origin and evolution of metazoan development. Despite a number of recent molecular studies and a rich fossil record of sponges and cnidarians, the evolutionary relationships of the early branching metazoan groups to each other and to a putative outgroup, the choanoflagellates, remain uncertain. This situation may be the result of the limited amount of phylogenetic information found in single genes and the small number of relevant taxa surveyed. To alleviate the effect of these analytical factors in the phylogenetic reconstruction of early-branching metazoan lineages, we have cloned multiple protein-coding genes from two choanoflagellates and diverse sponges, cnidarians, and a ctenophore. Comparisons of sequences for a-tubulin, b-tubulin, Elongation Factor 2, HSP90, and HSP70 robustly support the hypothesis that choanoflagellates are closely affiliated with animals. However, analyses of single and concatenated amino acid sequences fail to resolve the relationships either between early branching metazoan groups or between Metazoa and choanoflagellates. We demonstrate that variable rates of evolution among lineages, sensitivity of the analyses to taxon selection and conflicts in the phylogenetic signal contained in different amino acid sequences obscure the phylogenetic associations among the early branching Metazoa. These factors raise concerns about the ability to resolve the phylogenetic history of animals with molecular sequences. A consensus view of animal evolution may require investigations of genome-scale characters.
S2159	G. W. Grimm;S. S. Renner;A. Stamatakis;V. Hemleben	2006	A nuclear ribosomal DNA phylogeny of Acer inferred with maximum likelihood, splits graphs, and motif analyses of 606 sequences	Evolutionary Bioinformatics	2		279-294				The internal transcribed spacer (ITS) region of nuclear ribosomal DNA is a biparentally inherited, multi-copy marker that is widely used to infer phylogenetic relationships among closely related taxa. In a strict sense, sequences in ITS data sets are not homologous unless one was to sequence tandem repeats at a specified position in the nucleolus organizer region. We use maximum likelihood (ML) and splits graphs analyses to extract phylogenetic information from 584 (mostly cloned) ITS sequences, representing 81 species and subspecies of Acer, plus both species of its sister genus Dipteronia. Analyses of motifs and clade-specific substitution biases compared Acer to several hundred ITS sequences of Sapindales from GenBank, representing Anacardiaceae, Burseraceae, Meliaceae, Rutaceae, and Sapindaceae. Taxon sampling within the genus involved multiple accessions of representatives from all morphological groups, including all known polyploid maple taxa. Because of the large size of the matrices, we used RAxML-VI-HPC for tree inference under the best-fit GTR+&#61511; model. Results obtained with the full 584-sequence matrix were compared with those from reduced matrices of consensus sequences that used ambiguity coding to account for within-species/subspecies variation. Neighbor-nets and bipartition networks were used to visualize conflict among character state patterns. Species clusters observed in the trees and networks agree well with morphology-based classifications; of de Jong‚s (1994) 16 sections, nine are supported in neighbor-net and bipartition networks, and ten by sequence motifs and the ML tree; of his 19 series, 14 are supported in networks, motifs, and the ML tree. Within-taxon ITS divergence did not differ between diploid and polyploid species or subspecies, and there was little evidence of differentiated parental ITS haplotypes, suggesting that concerted evolution in Acer acts rapidly.
S2192	A. Jeyaprakash;M. A. Hoy	2008	First divergence time estimate of spiders, scorpions, mites and ticks (Subphylum: Chelicerata) inferred from mitochondrial phylogeny	Experimental and Applied Acarology							Spiders, scorpions, mites and ticks (chelicerates) form one of the most diverse groups of arthropods on land, but their origin and times of diversification are not yet established. We estimated, for the first time, the molecular divergence times for these chelicerates using complete mitochondrial sequences from 25 taxa. All mitochondrial genes were evaluated individually or after concatenation. Sequences belonging to three missing genes (ND3, 6 and tRNA-Asp) from three taxa, as well as the faster-evolving ribosomal RNAs (12S and 16S), tRNAs, and the third base of each codon from 11 protein-coding genes (PCGs) (COI-III, CYTB, ATP8, 6, ND1-2, 4L and 4-5), were identified and removed. The remaining concatenated sequences from 11 PCGs produced a completely resolved phylogenetic tree and confirmed that all chelicerates are monophyletic. Removing the third base from each codon was essential to resolve the phylogeny, which allowed deep divergence times to be calculated using three nodes calibrated with upper and lower priors. Our estimates indicate that the orders and classes of spiders, scorpions, mites and ticks diversified in the late Paleozoic, much earlier than previously reported from fossil date estimates. The divergence time estimated for ticks suggests that their first land hosts could have been amphibians rather than reptiles. Using molecular data, we separated the spider-scorpion clades and estimated their divergence times at 397 ± 23 million years ago. Algae, fungi, plants and animals, including insects, were well established on land when these chelicerates diversified. Future analyses, involving mitochondrial sequences from additional chelicerate taxa and the inclusion of nuclear genes (or entire genomes) will provide a more complete picture of the evolution of the Chelicerata, the second most abundant group of animals on earth.
S706	M. Binder;A. Bresinsky	2002	Retiboletus, a new genus for a species-complex in the Boletaceae producing retipolides	Feddes Repertorium	113	1-2	30-40	10.1002/1522-239x(200205)113:1/2<30::aid-fedr30>3.0.co;2-d			Boletus ornatipes and B. retipes are two closely related species in North America, which cannot be differentiated by morphological and anatomical characters. The 25S rDNA was partly sequenced from several isolates of B. ornatipes, B. retipes, and allied species in the Boletaceae to aid identification. The phylogenetic analysis using maximum likelihood suggests that both species are differently distributed. In addition, our results are supported by a previous study of Hellwig (1999), separating three groups in the B. retipes/ornatipes -complex based on chemotaxonomical characters. Retipolides form the major pigments in presently analyzed B. ornatipes and B. retipes collections and are also detected in B. flavoniger. This group of secondary metabolites is unique in the Boletales (for distribution of pigments in Boletales see Gill & Steglich 1987) and is characteristic of the new genus Retiboletus, in which B. ornatipes (type), B. retipes, and B. flavoniger are placed. A positive proof of retipolides is still missing in B. griseus and Tylopilus nigerrimus. Both species are transferred to Retiboletus according to morphological characters and sequence data.
S1113	D. Krueger;A. Gargas	2004	The basidiomycete genus Polyporus -- an emendation based on phylogeny and putative secondary structure of ribosomal RNA molecules	Feddes Repertorium	115	7-8	530-546	10.1002/fedr.200311052			The fungal genus Polyporus is an assemblage of white-rotting lignicolous basidiomycetes. It has undergone considerable expansion and contraction over a period of two and three quarter centuries. Current generic circumscription of Polyporus has kept the genus non-monophyletic. Species of Polyporus infrageneric group Polyporellus are closely related to some species of Lentinus. We introduce data for ITS2 spacer rRNA secondary structure evolution by quasi-independent comparison with large subunit rRNA phylogeny, and suggest a fraction of primary nuclear rDNA ITS sequence data as novel taxonomic characters. A major taxonomic shift is suggested, supported by molecular and morphological characters, and allowing inclusion of species with gilled hymenophores in Polyporus.
S1715	H. Kellner;P. Luis;F. Buscot	2007	Diversity of laccase-like multicopper oxidase (LMCO) genes in Morchellaceae: identification of genes potentially involved in extracellular activities related to plant litter decay	FEMS Microbiology Ecology							Despite the important role played by soil-inhabiting ascomycetes in plant litter decay processes, studies on diversity and function of their laccase-like multicopper oxidase (LMCO) genes are scarce. In the present work, the LMCO gene diversity in 15 strains representing nine Morchellaceae and one Discinaceae species was evaluated by PCR. One to six different genes were found within the species, representing 26 different sequence types. Cluster analysis revealed LMCO genes belonging to four main gene families encoding different protein classes (Class I to IV). To identify the genes related to extracellular activities and potentially involved in litter decay processes, liquid cultures were induced by different aromatic compounds. Morchella conica and Verpa conica showed the strongest LMCO activity enhancement in presence of the naturally occurring phenolic compound guaiacol and their expressed LMCO genes were identified by sequencing. Only genes belonging to the gene families encoding the protein Classes II and III were expressed. Both genes (Class II & III) of the mycorrhizal-like strain M. conica were exclusively expressed in presence of guaiacol. In contrast to the saprotrophic strain V. conica, the gene encoding the Class III protein was constitutively expressed as it was also found in control cultures without guaiacol.
S1104	E. Yokoyama;K. Yamagishi;A. Hara	2004	Development of a PCR-based mating-type assay for Clavicipitaceae	FEMS Microbiology Letters							This study developed a PCR-based mating-type assay for Clavicipitaceae. PCR primer sets for the mating-type genes MAT1-1-1 and MAT1-2-1 were designed based on the amino acid sequences of the conserved alpha and HMG boxes, respectively. The PCR-based mating-type assay could be applied for various clavicipitaceous genera (Balansia, Claviceps, Cordyceps and Epichloe. Most of the clavicipitaceous fungi possessed either MAT1-1-1 or MAT1-2-1, and were supposed to be heterothallic. Although the PCR products obtained by the mating-type assay were short, the phylogenetic trees of the mating-type genes gave better resolutions than that of 18S rDNA and agreed well to their econutritional modes.
S1576	E. Yokoyama;M. Arakawa;K. Yamagishi;A. Hara	2006	Phylogenetic and structural analyses of the mating-type loci in Clavicipitaceae	FEMS Microbiology Letters							Entomopathogens and other econutritional fungi belonging to Clavicipitaceae were phylogenetically analyzed on the basis of the 18S ribosomal DNA and mating-type genes (MAT1-1-1 and MAT1-2-1). The phylogenies of the mating-type genes yielded better resolutions than that of 18S rDNA. Entomopathogens (Cordyceps bassiana, Cordyceps brongniartii, Cordyceps militaris, Cordyceps sinclairii, Cordyceps takaomontana, Isaria cateniannulata, Isaria farinosa, Isaria fumosorosea, Isaria javanica, Lecanicillium muscarium and Torrubiella flava) were considered as a phylogenetically defined group, and were closely related to mycopathogens (Lecanicillium psalliotae and Verticillium fungicola). They located at more descendant positions in the mating-type trees than other fungi, and lacked the mating-type gene MAT1-1-3. The deletion of MAT1-1-3 was supposed to have occurred once in Clavicipitaceae, and a good indication for the evolution of Clavicipitaceae. Other entomopathogens (Cordyceps cylindrica, Cordyceps subsessilis, Metarhizium anisopliae and Nomuraea rileyi) and pathogens of plants, nematodes and slime molds, were relatively related to each other, and possessed MAT1-1-3, but were supposed to be heterogeneous. Root-associated fungi did not form any clade with other species.
S1863	V. Andjic;M. N. Cortinas;G. E. S. J. Hardy;M. J. Wingfield;T. I. Burgess	2007	Multiple gene genealogies reveal important relationships between species of Phaeophleospora infecting Eucalyptus leaves	FEMS Microbiology Letters	268		22-33				Eucalypus spp. are increasingly used in production forestry worldwide with over 3 million ha of exotic plantations, especially in the tropics and sub-tropics. The disease load in these plantations has increased over time due to numerous introductions of pathogens from Australia, but also due to host jumps of pathogens from other closely related plant taxa. The most commonly encountered leaf diseases are caused by Mycosphaerella spp. of which Phaeophleospora anamorphs are responsible for several diseases. Three species in particular can cause severe defoliation of young eucalypts; P. destructans, P. eucalypti and P. epicoccoides. Phaeophleospora destructans has a major impact on seedling survival in Asia and has not, as yet, been found in Australia where it is considered a serious threat to the biosecurity and biodiversity of native eucalypts. It can be difficult to distinguish Phaeophleospora spp. based on symptoms and thus a rapid diagnostic tool is required. In this study we have constructed a multiple gene genealogy of the main Phaeophleospora spp. and designed specific primers to detect their presence directly from leaf samples. The phylogenetic position of the species within Mycosphaerella was established and they were all found to be closely related to other important pathogens, M. nubilosa, M. cryptica and Colletogloeopsis zuluensis. The specific primers developed can now be used for diagnostic and screening purposes within Australia.
S9x8x96c10c49c23	S. J. Steppan	1995	Revision of the tribe Phyllotini (Rodentia: Sigmodontinae), with a phylogenetic hypothesis for the Sigmodontinae	Fieldiana: Zoology, New Series	80		1-112				The phylogenetic relationships of the South American rodents of the tribe Phyllotini are reviewed, considering both the phylogenetic relationships of the phyllotines to the other sigmodontine tribes, and relationships within the phyllotines. Cladistic analysis of 40 morphological characters for 28 sigmodontine taxa provides a working hypothesis of sigmodontine phylogenetics, phyllotine monophyly, and likely sister groups to the phyllotines. Five Old World and six New World cricetid taxa represent outgroups and together they root the sigmodontine tree within a paraphyletic thomasomyine group. The analysis corroborates the recent proposal of a monophyletic oryzomyine group that includes the tetralophodont genera Holochilus, Pseudoryzomys, and Zygodontomys. A supratribal clade is indicated that includes the Akodontini, Phyllotini, Scapteromyini, and Punomys. The distinctiveness and monophyly of the Central American tylomyine group is strongly supported. The taxonomic distribution of and variation in morphological characters of the dentition, skull, skeleton, and soft anatomy is discussed. Apparent biases in the evolutionary polarity of reductive characters are identified in detail from a broad taxonomic survey (174 species) for intra- and interspecific variation in number of vertebrae, as well as from optimization of other characters on the phylogenetic hypotheses. Conflicting results from various phylogenetic studies suggest that Sigmodon be considered Sigmodontinae incertae sedis. Pseudoryzomys and Punomys are removed from the phyllotines and Phyllotini is diagnosed. A cladistic analysis of 35 phyllotine taxa using 98 morphological characters is presented and the taxonomy of the phyllotine genera is revised. Species of Andalgalomys are referred to Graomys. Removal of micropus from Auliscomys to the genus Loxodontomys is supported. The two most species-rich genera, Phyllotis and Calomys, appear to be paraphyletic, but their species relationships are insufficiently resolved to justify modifying their taxonomy at this time.
S976	K. Fliegerová;B. Hodrová;K. Voigt	2004	Classical and Molecular Approaches as a Powerful Tool for the Characterization of Rumen Polycentric Fungi	Folia Microbiologica (Praha)	49	2	157-164				The ribosomal ITS 1 and ITS 2 fragments from 8 isolates of polycentric rumen anaerobic fungi were PCR-amplified and sequenced; the sequences obtained were aligned with published data and phylogenetic analyses were performed. The analysis of ITS 1 fragment clearly differentiated between the two polycentric genera Orpinomyces and Anaeromyces and these classification is supported by morphological observation. A multi-order phylogram based on ITS2 sequences proved that anaerobic rumen fungi are separated from aerobic chytrids, which form a well-supported monophylum with highest possible bootstrap proportion values of 100 % . Sequence analysis of ITS regions is a powerful tool for the classification of anaerobic fungi, however morphological description of strains is still necessary because some genera of rumen fungi display a high genetic heterogeneity.
S2362	S. L. Jackson;A. Maxwell;T. I. Burgess;B. Dell;G. E. S. J. Hardy	2006	Mycosphaerella species from Eucalyptus in Western Australia	Forest Ecology and Management	255		3931-3937	10.1016/j.foreco.2008.03.024			Eucalyptus globulus is the predominant exotic hardwood plantation species in Western Australian (WA), and is often planted adjacent to native eucalypt forests. The increase in number of Mycosphaerella species associated with Mycosphaerella Leaf Disease (MLD) in E. globulus plantations in WA in the past decade has raised concern about the possible movement of pathogens between the native forests and plantations. In order to determine whether the introduction of new E. globulus genetics into WA may have further exacerbated this situation, juvenile and adult foliage were taken from a genetics trial near Albany, WA consisting of 60 full-sib families and Mycosphaerella species identified using morphological and molecular tools. Eleven species of Mycosphaerella were identified from one plantation: Mycosphaerella fori (Pseudocercospora fori) and M. ellipsoidea are new records for Australia; M. tasmaniensis (Passalora tasmaniensis) and M. suttoniae (Kirramyces epicoccoides) are new records for WA; and M. nubilosa, M. cryptica, M. marksii, M. molleriana, M. lateralis, M. aurantia and M. parva, previously recorded for WA. The most frequently isolated species from juvenile foliage was M. marksii (77%) followed by M. nubilosa (33%). Mycosphaerella nubilosa was most frequently isolated from adult leaves (88%) followed by M. parva (7.5%). Three species, M. molleriana, M. lateralis and M. cryptica, were only isolated from adult leaves while M. ellipsoidea was only isolated from juvenile leaves. These records increase the number of known Mycosphaerella species from eucalypts in WA from ten to thirteen. The increase in the number, distribution and impact of Mycosphaerella species contributing to MLD in WA is of concern both to the potential productivity of the plantations and the biosecurity of native WA Eucalyptus species. Continued monitoring of the plantation estate is required to understand the dynamics of the host-pathogen interactions.
S1643	J. W. Hanna;N. B. Klopfenstein;M. S. Kim;G. I. McDonald;J. A. Moore	2006	Phylogeographic patterns of Armillaria ostoyae in the western United States	Forest Pathology							Nuclear ribosomal DNA regions (i.e., large subunit, internal transcribed spacer, 5.8S, and intergenic spacer) were sequenced using a direct-PCR method from Armillaria ostoyae genets collected from the western USA. Many of the A. ostoyae genets contained heterogeneity among rDNA repeats, indicating intragenomic variation and likely intraspecific hybridization. Intragenomic variation was verified by visually editing base-sequence offsets in regions with insertions/deletions, and using sequence-specific internal primers to resequence heterogeneous regions. Phylogenetic analyses with Bayesian Inference methods were used to define groups within A. ostoyae. Analysis of A. ostoyae from outside the western USA indicated the presence of a Circumboreal group of A. ostoyae that also occurs in Utah; two other phylogeographic groups were associated with the Rocky Mountain and Pacific Northwest regions of the USA. Mixed sequence types, an indication of intraspecific hybrids, were common in some geographic regions. Hybridization events may have influenced species evolution, contributing to variation in pathogenicity and virulence. The occurrence of these groups and intraspecific hybrids also indicates that paleogeography and paleoclimate may have influenced the phylogeography of A. ostoyae. In addition, other Armillaria species were examined for evolutionary relationships with the groups of A. ostoyae. These findings will provide a basis for future research relating ecological function to genetic diversity within A. ostoyae.
S1452	M. S. Kim;N. B. Klopfenstein;J. W. Hanna;G. I. McDonald	2006	Characterization of North American Armillaria species by ribosomal DNA sequences and AFLP markers	Forest Pathology							Phylogenetic and genetic relationships among 10 North American Armillaria species were analyzed using sequence data from ribosomal DNA (rDNA) including intergenic spacer (IGS-1), internal transcribed spacer, 5.8S rDNA (ITS+5.8S), and nuclear large subunit rDNA (nLSU), and Amplified Fragment Length Polymorphism (AFLP) markers. Based on rDNA sequence data, the nLSU region is less variable among Armillaria species than the ITS+5.8S and IGS-1 regions (nLSU<ITS+5.8S<IGS-1). Phylogenetic analyses of the rDNA sequences suggested A. mellea, A. tabescens, and A. nabsnona are well-separated from the remaining Armillaria species (A. ostoyae, A. gemina, A. calvescens, A. sinapina, A. gallica, NABS X, and A. cepestipes). Several Armillaria species (A. calvescens, A. sinapina, A. gallica, NABS X, and A. cepestipes) clustered together based on rDNA sequencing data; however, AFLP data provided delineation among these species. AFLP analysis supported taxonomic classification established by conventional methods (morphology and interfertility tests). Several AFLP genetic markers offer potential for distinguishing currently available North American Biological Species of Armillaria in future biological and taxonomical studies.
S1724	S. Tokuda;Y. Ota;T. Hattori	2007	Root and butt rot of Todo fir (Abies sachalinensis) caused by Heterobasidion annosum s.l. in Hokkaido, Japan	Forest Pathology	37	3	155-166	10.1111/j.1439-0329.2007.00492.x			The occurrence and symptoms of root and butt rot were examined in a 35x~30 m plot of 68-yr-old Todo fir plantation in Hokkaido, Japan. Forty-seven percent of the cut stumps were decayed and 52% of the decayed stumps showed similar decay characteristics with yellowish orange to light brown coloration and expanded pockets in the heartwood. Morphological characteristics of the pure cultures isolated from the decay were similar to the cultures isolated from basidiocarps of Heterobasidion annosum sensu lato, found on fallen logs outside of the research site. Also DNA analysis based on the combined data set of three gene loci (glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase, heat shock protein 80-1 and elongation factor 1-alpha genes) showed that the isolates from the decay are included in the same clade with the Japanese H. annosum s.l. isolates. They form a subclade to H. parviporum (the European S group of H. annosum s.l.). This is the first report of molecular determination of H. annosum s.l. isolated from root and butt rot in a plantation in Japan.
S2313	C. A. Pérez;M. J. Wingfield;N. A. Altier;R. A. Blanchette	2009	Mycosphaerellaceae and Teratosphaeriaceae associated with Eucalyptus leaf diseases and stem cankers in Uruguay	Forest Pathology	39	5	349-360	10.1111/j.1439-0329.2009.00598.x			Mycosphaerella leaf diseases represent one of the most important impediments to Eucalyptus plantation forestry. Yet they have been afforded little attention in Uruguay where these trees are an important resource for a growing pulp industry. The objective of this study was to identify species of Mycosphaerellaceae and Teratosphaeriaceae resulting from surveys in all major Eucalyptus growing areas of the country. Species identification was based on morphological characteristics and DNA sequence comparisons for the ITS region of the rDNA operon. A total of ten Mycosphaerellaceae and Teratosphaeriaceae were found associated with leaf spots and stem cankers on Eucalyptus. Of these, Mycosphaerella aurantia, M. heimii, M. lateralis, M. scytalidii, Pseudocercospora norchiensis, Teratosphaeria ohnowa and T. pluritubularis are newly recorded in Uruguay. This is also the first report of M. aurantia occurring outside of Australia, and the first record of P. norchiensis and T. pluritubularis in South America. New hosts were identified for K. gauchensis, M. aurantia, M. marksii, M. lateralis, M. scytalidii, P. norchiensis, T. molleriana, T. ohnowa and T. pluritubularis. Interestingly K. gauchensis, which has been known only as a stem pathogen, was isolated from leaf spots on E. maidenii and E. tereticornis. The large number of Mycosphaerellaceae and Teratosphaeriaceae occurring in Uruguay is disturbing and raises concerns regarding the introduction of new pathogens that could threaten not only Eucalyptus plantations but also native forests.
S2133	V. Careau;O. R. P. Bininda-Emonds;D. Thomas;D. Réale;M. M. Humphries	2008	Exploration strategies map along fast-slow metabolic and life-history continuums in muroid rodents	Functional Ecology							1. Personality is highly relevant to ecology and the evolution of fast-slow metabolic and life-history strategies. One of the most important personality traits is exploratory behaviour, usually measured on an animal introduced to a novel environment (e.g. open-field test). 2. Here, we use a unique comparative dataset on open-field exploratory behaviour of muroid rodents to test a key assumption of a recent evolutionary model, i.e. that exploration thoroughness is positively correlated to age at first reproduction (AFR). We then examine how AFR and exploratory behaviour are related to basal metabolic rate (BMR). 3. Inter-specific variation in exploratory behaviour was positively correlated with AFR. Both AFR and exploration behaviour were negatively correlated with BMR. These results remained significant when taking phylogeny into account. 4. We suggest that species occupying unproductive and unpredictable environments simultaneously benefit from high exploration, low BMR, and delayed AFR because exploration increases the likelihood of finding scarce resources, whereas low BMR and delayed reproduction enhance survival during frequent resources shortages. 5. This study provides the first empirical evidence for a link between personality, life-history, phylogeny, and energy metabolism at the inter-specific level. The superficial-thorough exploration continuum can be mapped along the fast-slow metabolic and life-history continuums.
S2506	Y. J. Choi;M. Thines;F. Runge;S. B. Hong;S. Telle;H. D. Shin	2011	Evidence for high degrees of specialisation, evolutionary diversity, and morphological distinctiveness in the genus Bremia	Fungal Biology	115	2	102-111	10.1016/j.funbio.2010.10.010			Bremia lactucae is one of the economically most important pathogens in lettuce production. Recent molecular studies have shown Bremia lactucae (Peronosporales) to consist of several genetically distinct entities. However, as only few accessions from the same host have been investigated and it is generally believed that it is hardly possible to use morphological characteristics for species delimitation in Bremia, B. lactucae is still regarded as a sole species of Bremia causing downy mildew disease of the family Asteraceae. Therefore, multiple accessions of selected species that had been described decades ago, but have not been widely accepted, were investigated both on the basis of multi-gene molecular phylogenies and morphological characters. All previously described species included, B. microspora, B. ovata, B. saussureae, and B. sonchicola could be confirmed as highly distinct, host specific entities. Also morphological characterisitcs of their conidiophores and conidia allowed delimitation of the five species. Therefore, the wide species concept to merge all Bremia species on the Cichorioideae under B. lactucae is inappropriate. In addition, it could be shown that B. elliptica is phylogenetically distinct from the second species infecting the genus Lactuca, B. lactucae. It is therefore concluded that Bremia lactucae is most likely limited to Lactuca sativa and closely related species, and thus infections of unrelated wild Asteraceae weeds with Bremia are not posing a risk for lettuce production. The finding that Bremia lactucae is highly host specific might stimulate the search for durable resistance genes in genera closely related to the genus Lactuca and in divergent species of the genus itself.
S1542	A. Alves;A. Correia;A. J. L. Phillips	2006	Multiple gene genealogies and morphological data support Diplodia cupressi sp. nov., previously recognized as D. pinea f. sp. cupressi, as a distinct species	Fungal Diversity	23		1-15				The causal agent of Diplodia canker of cypress (Cupressus spp.) in the Mediterranean region was originally though to represent a sub-population of the pine pathogen Diplodia pinea and was referred to as D. pinea f. sp. cupressi. In the USA a similar fungus causing canker and dieback of Juniperus spp. was referred to as Diplodia mutila (teleomorph: Botryosphaeria stevensii). The aim of this study was to characterise the cypress pathogen in terms of morphology and sequences of the ITS1/ITS2 operon, the beta-tubulin and translation elongation factor 1-alpha genes. Phylogenetic analyses showed that the cypress canker pathogen resides in a clade together with other Diplodia species. It is, however, distinct from from both D. pinea and D. multila and more closely related to Botryosphaeria tsugae. The distinct phylogenetic position is supported by small differences in conidial morphology and it is, therefore, described as Diplodia cupressi sp. nov.
S1665	T. I. Burgess;P. A. Barber;S. Sufaati;D. Xu;G. E. S. J. Hardy;B. Dell	2006	Mycosphaerella spp. on Eucalyptus in Asia; new species, new hosts and new records	Fungal Diversity							Leaf spots caused by Mycosphaerella spp. are of increasing concern in eucalypt plantations around the world, but few species have been reported infecting eucalypts in Asia. From leaf material collected in China, Vietnam and Indonesia, we describe three new Mycosphaerella spp.; M. vietnamiensis, M. obscuris and M. yunnanensis. Mycosphaerella crystallina, previously known only from South Africa, and M. stramenticola, previously reported from Eucalyptus leaf litter in Brazil, are new records. Mycosphaerella citri, an important pathogen of citrus, was found infecting Eucalyptus. Mycosphaerella marksii and M. suttoniae, which have been previously reported in Asia, were regularly encountered. Pseudocercospora spp. were also common throughout the region. This study highlights the potential biodiversity of Mycosphaerella spp. on eucalypts in South-East Asia.
S1516	C. C. Carmaran;A. I. Romero;L. M. Giussani	2006	An approach towards a new phylogenetic classification in Diatrypaceae	Fungal Diversity							The ascal morphology and its taxonomic significance were explored in almost all species of octosporous Diatrypaceae: Cryptosphaeria, Diatrype, Echinomyces, Eutypa and Eutypella. The resulting character information along with other morphological characters were used to infer phylogenetic relationships among species and genera in the family. Peroneutypa, is resurrected to accomodateseven species and the following new combinations are proposed: Peroneutypa alsophila, Peroneutypa arecae, Peroneutypa comosa, Peroneutypa curvispora, Peroneutypa gliricidiae, Peroneutypa kochiana, Peroneutypa scoparia and Peroneutypa obesa. A key to species of Peroneutypa is provided. These new taxonomic arrangements, based on phylogenetic evidence, are proposed here for the first time.
S1603	I. Hidayat;R. Jeewon;C. To-anun;K. D. Hyde	2006	The genus Oxydothis: New palmicolous taxa and phylogenetic relationships within the Xylariales	Fungal Diversity	23						Oxydothis (Xylariales) is an ascomycete genus, commonly encountered on decaying monocot plants, such as palms. During our study on diversity of palmicolous fungi in northern Thailand, we encountered three new species of Oxydothis. Oxydothis cyrtostachicola sp. nov., O. wallichianensis sp. nov., and O. inaequalis sp. nov. are described and illustrated in this paper. The three novel species differ from other morphologically similar Oxydothis species in ascomata shape and ostiole position, ascal ring, and ascospore morphology. Phylogenetic affiliations of the new taxa with members of related ascomycete families within the Xylariales are discussed based on morphology and nrDNA sequence data. The phylogenetic relationships of Oxydothis and its familial placement are still obscure based on the 28S nrDNA sequence analyses.28S nrDNA genes sequences do not provide significant phylogenetic information into the evolutionary relationships of these xylariaceous fungi. ITS nrDNA sequence analyses, however, indicate that Oxydothis is more closely related to members of the Amphisphaeriaceae than Diatrypaceae and Xylariaceae.
S1476	R. Kodsueb;R. Jeewon;D. Vijaykrishna;E. H. C. McKenzie;P. Lumyong;S. Lumyong;K. D. Hyde	2006	Systematic revision of Tubeufiaceae based on morphological and molecular data	Fungal Diversity	21						The family Tubeufiaceae is circumscribed for taxa in the Pleosporales that possess superficial, white, pallid to bright, ascomata, which may darken at maturity. The family currently includes 21 genera with varied taxonomic histories, a result of disparate opinions regarding the importance of several different morphological characters. In this study, nucleotide sequences from 28S rDNA from different taxa of the Tubeufiaceae and allied families were analysed under different optimality criteria (Maximum Parsimony, Likelihood and Bayesian) to assess phylogenetic relationships. Phylogenies obtained using different tree construction methods yielded essentially similar topologies. Results from the molecular data do not correspond to established morphological schemes. Characters such as color of ascomata, shape of ascospores and anamorphic taxa do not appear to be significant in delineating several genera within the Tubeufiaceae while at the familial level, Tubeufiaceae does not appear to be restricted to those bitunicate fungi characterised by superficial, white and pallid to bright ascomata and filiform ascospores. In addition, phylogenies also indicate that Tubeufiaceae is more closely related to the Venturiaceae, and therefore its current taxonomic placement within the order Pleosporales is justified. Results also indicate that Acanthostigma, Boerlagiomyces and Letendraea are phylogenetically unrelated to other members of the Tubeufiaceae and therefore it is highly possible that they should be excluded from Tubeufiaceae. In this study, the family Tubeufiaceae is redefined based on existing morphological information and phylogenies.
S1514	A. R. Liu;T. Xu;L. D. Guo	2006	Molecular and morphological description of Pestalotiopsis hainanensis sp. nov., a new endophyte from the tropical region of China	Fungal Diversity							During a survey of the diversity of Pestalotiopsis species in the tropical region of China, a new endophytic fungus Pestalotiopsis hainanensis was isolated from the stem of Podocarpus macrophyllus at Xinglong Tropical Botanical Garden of Hainan Province. The new species is morphologically distinguished from the similar species P. karstenii in having unbranched and short apical appendages, from P. heteroconis in the absence of basal appendages, and from P. westerdijkii in the different median cell colour and absent basal appendage. Furthermore, this new species has a large conidium length/width ratio. Phylogenetic analysis based on ITS region (ITS1, 5.8S and ITS2) and beta-tubulin 2 gene (tub2) indicated that P. hainanensis is different from P. karstenii, P. heteroconis and P. westerdijkii. It is suggested that when a new Pestalotiopsis species is described, both of morphological characters and molecular phylogenetic information are necessary to prove the new taxon is unique from other known species.
S1613	C. Y. Liu;W. Y. Zhuang	2006	Relationships among some members of the genus Otidea (Pezizales, Pyronemataceae)	Fungal Diversity	23						Relationships among some species of the genus Otidea were investigated based on sequence analyses of 28S rDNA, as well as morphological features. Phylogenetic trees generated using Neighbor joining, Maximum parsimony and Bayesian inference methods showed that Otidea is a monophyletic group. Our morphological and molecular data indicate that Flavoscypha should be synonymized with Otidea and that Otideopsis is treated as a subgenus of Otidea.
S1443	A. J. L. Phillips;P. Oudemans;A. Correia;A. Alves	2006	Characterization and epitypification of Botryosphaeria corticis, the cause of blueberry cane canker	Fungal Diversity							Botryosphaeria corticis was collected from a commercial field of Vaccinium corymbosum cv. Bluecrop in New Jersey, USA. The connection between the anamorph and the teleomorph was confirmed through isolations made from single ascospores. The fungus was characterized in terms of morphology of the teleomorph on the host, the anamorph in pure culture, and sequences of the ITS1/ITS2 regions of the ribosomal DNA operon. Morphologically the fungus compared well with the protologue of B. corticis. Phylogenetic analyses showed that the isolates from New Jersey reside in a clade together with isolates of the same species from North Carolina and this clade is sister to B. dothidea. The specimen from New Jersey is designated as epitype.
S1575	W. Yongjin;Z. M. Tan;C. Murat;S. Jeandroz;F. L. Tacon	2006	Molecular taxonomy of Chinese truffles belonging to the Tuber rufum and Tuber puberulum groups	Fungal Diversity							
S2145	F. Arenal;G. Platas;F. Pelaez	2007	A new endophytic species of Preussia (Sporormiaceae) inferred from morphological observations and molecular phylogenetic analysis	Fungal Diversity	25		1-17				A new species of Preussia as an endophyte of different typical Mediterranean plant species, is newly described and illustrated based on molecular and morphological features. Preussia mediterranea resembles P. australis, P. africana and P. similis from a morphological point of view, but appeared closer to P minima and P. isabellae by molecular analysis. Phylogenetic analysis of the entire ITS region combined with the D1-D2 domains of the 28S rRNA gene, and a fragment of the elongation factor EF-1∞Ñ gene, using Maximum Likelihood and a Bayesian Markov Chain Monte Carlo approach, generally resulted in statistically well-supported clades for all the species studied. Morphological data and molecular phylogenetic analysis supported the recognition of the new taxon
S2064	Y. J. Choi;H. D. Shin;S. B. Hong;M. Thines	2007	Morphological and molecular discrimination among Albugo candida materials infecting Capsella bursa-pastoris world-wide	Fungal Diversity	27		11-34				The genus Albugo with A. candida as the type species causes white blister rust disease in economically important crops. Recently, molecular approaches revealed the high degree of genetic diversity exhibited within A. candida complex. However, before any taxonomic division of the complex at the species level, the correct status of A. candida on Capsella bursa-pastoris, from which it was originally described, should be determined. A worldwide study of white rust pathogens on C. bursa-pastoris was performed on 36 specimens, using morphological analysis and sequence analysis from the cytochrome c oxidase subunit II (COX2) region of mtDNA, the internal transcribed spacer (ITS) region of the rDNA, and D1 and D2 regions of the nrDNA. Specimens were obtained from Asia (India, Korea, Palestine), Europe (England, Finland, Germany, Hungary, Ireland, Latvia, Netherlands, Romania, Russia, Sweden, Switzerland), North and South America (Argentina, Canada, USA), and Oceania (Australia). The molecular data indicated strong support for a species partition separating Korean and other continental specimens. There were 7.25, 17.4, and 4.8 % sequence dissimilarity between the two groups in COX2, ITS, and 28S regions, respectively. The surface ornamentation of oospores of Korean specimens was morphologically distinguished from previously known characteristics of A. candida. Therefore, Albugo koreana sp. nov., collected from C. bursa-pastoris in Korea, is described here. The concept of A. candida sensu stricto is discussed and a type specimen determined for this species.
S1893	U. Damm;P. H. Fourie;P. W. Crous	2007	Aplosporella prunicola, a novel species of anamorphic Botryosphaeriaceae	Fungal Diversity	27		35-43				Aplosporella prunicola is a newly described species associated with a dead branch of Prunus persica var. nucipersica from South Africa. Based on its phylogeny of the 28S rDNA (LSU) gene, the genus Aplosporella represents yet another anamorph lineage within the Botryosphaeriaceae (Botryosphaeriales). Aplosporella is characterized by having multilocular conidiomata opening by a single ostiole, verrucose, brown conidia, and the presence of prominent paraphyses. Details pertaining to the pathogenicity and host specificity of Aplosporella spp., remain to be elucidated.
S2143	V. Gonzalez;K. Vanky;G. Platas;M. Lutz	2007	Portalia gen. nov. (Ustilaginomycotina)	Fungal Diversity	27		45-59				A new, unispecific genus, Portalia is described for Cintractia uljanishcheviana, a smut fungus collected for the first time in Europe (Spain), in addition to its type locality in Kazakhstan. The place of the new genus, in relation to other smut genera, like Cintractia, Dermatosorus, Gymnocintractia, Leucocintractia, Parvulago, Pilocintractia and Stegocintractia is discussed and shown in a phylogram, based on ribosomal DNA LSU sequence analyses. Detailed description, including spore germination, obtained for the first time, as well as illustrations are given for Portalia uljanishcheviana
S1673	H. T. Le;J. Nuytinck;A. Verbeken;S. Lumyong;D. E. Desjardin	2007	Lactarius in Northern Thailand: 1. Lactarius subgenus Piperites	Fungal Diversity	24		111-162				This paper reports on Lactarius subgenus Piperites from Northern Thailand and is the first in a series resulting from a complete revision of the genus for the area. Five taxa are described as new for science: Lactarius formosus, L. austrotorminosus, L. austrozonarius, L. alboscrobiculatus and L. alboscrobiculatus var. roseopurpureus. Three other new species are described and illustrated but not formally described. Lactarius akahatsu and L. hatsudake, described from Japan, are recorded for Thailand, and L. purpureus, described from Thailand in 1966 is also listed here with new records. Species concepts and comparisons with species of other continents are based on morphological and molecular data (ITS-region).
S1888	A. Ortega;V. N. Suárez-Santiago;J. D. Reyes	2007	Morphological and ITS identification of Cortinarius species (section Calochroi) collected in Mediterranean Quercus woodlands	Fungal Diversity							Species of Cortinarius sect. Calochroi show a high grade of morphological variability in the Mediterranean region with regard to vicariant populations in the Eurosiberian region. This has contributed to confusion on taxonomy and nomenclature, especially when the variability affects the characters traditionally used for taxonomic delimitation. In this paper, we have attempted to clarify the taxonomy and nomenclature of several Calochroi taxa in the Mediterranean area by using macromorphological and spore analyses, as well as phylogenetic analysis of ITS sequences. We have demonstrated the usefulness of ITS sequences for species rank identification in Cortinarius (barcoding). We have been able to assign the studied material to eight species using ITS sequences (C. haasii, C. parasuaveolens, C. platypus, C. rickenianus, C. sancti-felicis, C. selandicus, C. splendidior and C. subgracilis), and to detect misidentified collections that were used by their authors to describe a new species (C. violaceipes). Moreover, molecular data have been useful to test the taxonomic value of morphological and spore characters. The morphological analysis has enabled us to detect morphological variability previously unreported in several taxa. A new variety, C. haasii var. quercus-ilicicola, is proposed on the basis of morphological and molecular data. Also, the taxonomic status of C. rickenianus is discussed. Finally, our results increase both the distribution area as well as the ecological preferences of five studied species, and several important biogeographical disjunctions are reported (C. selandicus and C. subgracilis)
S1729	A. J. L. Phillips;A. Alves	2007	Diplodia seriata, the anamorph of "Botryosphaeria" obtusa	Fungal Diversity							
S2062	U. Pinruan;J. Sakayaroj;E. B. G. Jones;K. D. Hyde	2007	Thailandiomyces bisetulosus gen. et sp. nov. (Diaporthales, Sordariomycetidae, Sordariomycetes) and its anamorph Craspedodidymum, is described based on nuclear SSU and LSU rDNA sequences	Fungal Diversity	29						Thailiomyces gen. nov. (Diaporthales) is described from senescent trunks of a palm (Licuala longicalycata) in a peat swamp. Phylogenetic analyses of Thailiomyces was undertaken, with partial SSU and LSU rDNA sequences. Our morphological and molecular results show that this genus is well placed in the Diaporthales. However, it is not related to Diaporthe the genus it most closely resembles morphologically. It differs from Diaporthe species in number of characters: partially immerse to superficial ascomata, ascospore measurements, bipolar appendages, not surrounded by a mucilaginous sheath, and with Craspedodidymum licualae Pinruan as its anamorph.
S1940	A. Alves;P. W. Crous;A. Correia;A. J. L. Phillips	2008	Morphological and molecular data reveal cryptic speciation in Lasiodiplodia theobromae	Fungal Diversity	28		1-13				Lasiodiplodia theobromae is a common pathogen that occurs on a large number of hosts in the tropics and subtropics. A collection of isolates identified as L. theobromae was studied on the basis of sequence data from the ITS region and EF1-alpha gene. Phylogenetic analyses identified three well-supported clades within this group of isolates, one corresponding to L. theobromae and two others corresponding to potential cryptic species. The distinct phylogenetic position of the two clades is supported by differences in conidial morphology and these are, therefore, described as new species, Lasiodiplodia pseudotheobromae sp. nov. and Lasiodiplodia parva sp. nov.
S2215	P. Singh;C. Raghukumar;P. Verma;Y. Shouche	2008	Phylogenetic diversity of fungi from the deep-sea sediments of the Central Indian Basin and their growth characteristics	Fungal Diversity							We are reporting here the diversity of cultured fungi in deep-sea sediments of the Central Indian Basin obtained from a depth of ~5000 m. A total of 16 filamentous fungi and 12 yeasts isolated from 20 sediment cores of ~35 cm length were identified by 18S and ITS sequencing of SSU rDNA. Most of the filamentous fungi belonged to Ascomycota, while two belonged to Basidiomycota. Sequences of 18S as well as ITS gave matching identification of non-sporulating cultures. Microscopic identification of sporulating cultures mostly matched with either of the sequences and not both. Phylogenetic analysis of ascomycetes by 18S sequencing grouped them under 7 clusters belonging to Aspergillus, Cladosporium, Sagenomella sp, Exophiala sp, Capronia sp., Acremonium sp. and Tritirachium sp. Based on ITS sequencing they grouped into 6 clusters belonging to Aspergillus sp, uncultured member of Hypocreaceae family, Exophiala sp, uncultured soil fungus, Hypocreales and Trichothecium sp. The two basidiomycetes belonged to Tilletiopsis sp. by 18S as well as ITS sequences. In contrast, most of the yeast isolates belonged to Basidiomycota and only one isolate belonged to the phylum Ascomycota. Filamentous fungi as well as the yeasts grew at 200 bar/5oC indicating their adaptations to deep-sea conditions. Isolation of Sagenomella, Exophiala, Capronia and Tilletiopsis spp from deep-sea sediments is the first report. Key words: Deep-sea sediments, fungi, 18S, ITS sequences, hydrostatic pressure, Central Indian Basin
S2082	B. D. Wingfield;L. Maphosa;M. P. A. Coetzee;E. Mwenje;M. J. Wingfield	2008	Characterization of Zimbabwean Armillaria using IGS-1 sequences and AFLPs	Fungal Diversity							Armillaria root and butt rot disease is a common problem in peach orchards, tea and pine plantations in the Eastern Highlands of Zimbabwe. The species of Armillaria causing this disease have not been fully identified but it is believed that at least three species are involved. These included A. fuscipes (previously referred to as RFLP Group I) and two unnamed species known as RFLP Group II and RFLP Group III. The aim of the study was to use PCR-RFLP, sequences of the IGS-1 region of the rDNA operon and AFLP fingerprinting to characterize 27 Zimbabwean Armillaria isolates. PCR-RFLP tests showed that the isolates resided in five groups. Analysis of sequence data elucidated four groups, which were also supported by AFLP data. Eleven isolates belonged to RFLP Group I which is considered to represent A. fuscipes, four isolates were most similar to those previously referred to as Zimbabwean RFLP Group II and two isolates clustered most closely with RFLP Group III. The remaining isolates appear to represent Armillaria taxa not previously found in Zimbabwe.
S2343	Z. W. Ge;Z. L. Yang;P. Zhang;P. B. Matheny;D. S. Hibbett	2008	Flammulina species from China inferred by morphological and molecular data	Fungal Diversity	32		59-68				Morphological, phylogenetic and biogeographic studies were carried out on Chinese collections of Flammulina. It is revealed that at least four species [F. rossica, Flammulina sp. (HKAS 51191), F. velutipes and F. yunnanensis] occur in China. Flammulina yunnanensis is described as new based on morphological and molecular data. F. rossica, a new record to China, is confirmed to have a Holarctic distribution. Flammulina sp. has a hymeniform suprapellis but is phylogenetically close to F. velutipes. Analyses of the ITS/5.8S rDNA sequences of Flammulina species suggest that collections of F. velutipes from China are more closely related to a Canadian population rather than to those of Europe and the USA.
S2247	S. T. Bates;R. W. Roberson;D. E. Desjardin	2009	Arizona gasteroid fungi I: Lycoperdaceae (Agaricales, Basidiomycota)	Fungal Diversity							Twenty-eight species in the family Lycoperdaceae, commonly called Œpuffballs‚, are reported from Arizona, USA. In addition to widely distributed species, understudied species (e.g., Calvatia cf. leiospora and Holocotylon brandegeeanum) are treated. Taxonomic descriptions and illustrations, which include microscopic characters, are given for each species, and a dichotomous key is presented to facilitate identification. Basidiospore morphology was also examined ultrastructurally using scanning electron microscopy, and phylogenetic analyses were carried out on nrRNA gene sequences (ITS1, ITS2, and 5.8S) from 42 species within (or closely allied to) the Lycoperdaceae.
S2209	J. M. Santos;A. J. L. Phillips	2009	Resolving the complex of Diaporthe (Phomopsis) species occurring on Foeniculum vulgare in Portugal	Fungal Diversity	34		109-123				Diaporthe species and their Phomopsis anamorphs are endophytes and pathogens on a wide range of plant hosts, and are responsible for several diseases, some of which are of economic importance. Species in this genus have been described mainly on the basis of host association, and to a lesser extent on their micromorphology. However, studies have revealed that host association is of minor taxonomic importance, due to the wide host ranges of some species. Moreover, more than one species can occur on a single host. On the other hand, morphological characters are not always suitable for species definition because of their plasticity and overlap between different species. Foeniculum vulgare is an herbaceous plant known to harbour a complex of Diaporthe and Phomopsis species. In this study, this complex is resolved and several taxa are delineated. An intensive sampling of Diaporthe species and Phomopsis anamorphs found on F. vulgare in Portugal was done and a collection of isolates was established in culture. Isolates were characterised and grouped according to their microsatellite-primed PCR (MSP-PCR) profiles. Representative isolates were subsequently selected for a molecular phylogeny based on the rDNA ITS region (ITS1ˆ5.8SˆITS2). Combining morphological, cultural and molecular data, four species were distinguished from F. vulgare. Diaporthe angelicae is proved to be the most common pathogen of this host in Portugal. Diaporthe lusitanicae is newly described, whereas the teleomorph of Phomopsis theicola was shown to be distinct from Diaporthe theicola, and is described as Diaporthe neotheicola.
S2230	Y. S. Tan;D. E. Desjardin;B. A. Perry;S. Vikineswary;A. Noorlidah	2009	Marasmius sensu stricto in Peninsular Malaysia	Fungal Diversity	37		9-100				A total of 43 species of Marasmius sensu stricto belonging to six sections (Globulares, Hygrometrici, Leveilleani, Marasmius, Neosessiles and Sicci) are reported from Peninsular Malaysia. Macro- and micromorphological characters in combination with ITS sequence data were used to circumscribe species. Of the 43 species reported herein, 9 represent new species, viz., M. angustilamellatus, M. diminutivus, M. distantifolius, M. iras, M. kanchingensis, M. kuthubutheenii, M. musicolorus, M. ochropoides, and M. olivascens. An additional 19 species are new records for Peninsular Malaysia. Phylogenetic analyses of 36 Malaysian Marasmius species were conducted based on sequence data from nrDNA ITS-1ˆ5.8SˆITS-2 gene regions. The ITS data support the circumscription of species based on morphological characters and are useful in aiding species delimitations. The ITS data do not, however, support the current sectional delimitation of Marasmius wherein most sections are not monophyletic. Comprehensive descriptions, illustrations and photographs of each species, a key to aid in diagnosis, comparisons with allied species, and a preliminary phylogenetic construct are provided.
S2291	N. F. Wulandari;C. To-anun;K. D. Hyde;L. M. Duong;J. de Gruyter;J. P. Meffert;J. Z. Groenewald;P. W. Crous	2009	Phyllosticta citriasiana sp. nov., the cause of Citrus tan spot of Citrus maxima in Asia	Fungal Diversity	34		23-39				Guignardia citricarpa, the causal agent of Citrus Black Spot, is subject to phytosanitary legislation in the European Union and the U.S.A. This species is frequently confused with G. mangiferae, which is a non-pathogenic, wide host range species that is commonly isolated as endophyte from citrus fruits. Recently, necrotic spots similar to those caused by G. citricarpa were observed on fruit of Citrus maxima intercepted in consignments exported from Asia. In these spots, pycnidia and conidia of a Guignardia species closely resembling G. citricarpa were observed, and therefore measures were taken for the consignments in line with the European Union legislation for G. citricarpa. To determine the identity of the causal organism on this new host, fungal isolates were subjected to DNA sequence analysis of the internal transcribed spacer region (ITS1, 5.8S, ITS2), translation elongation factor 1-alpha (TEF1) and actin genes. A combined phylogenetic tree resolved three species correlating to G. citricarpa, G. mangiferae and a previously undescribed species, Phyllosticta citriasiana sp. nov., closely related to G. citricarpa. Morphologically P. citriasiana can be distinguished from G. citricarpa by having larger conidia, longer conidial appendages, and not producing any diffuse yellow pigment when cultivated on oatmeal agar (OA). Furthermore, it is distinguishable from G. mangiferae by having smaller conidia, with a narrower mucoid sheath. In culture, colonies of P. citriasiana can also be distinguished from G. citricarpa and G. mangiferae by being darker shades of grey and black on OA, malt extract agar (MEA), potato-dextrose agar, and cornmeal agar. Furthermore, cultures of P. citriasiana achieved optimal growth after 2 wk at 21 27°C, and ceased to grow at 30 33°C. In contrast, colonies of G. citricarpa and G. mangiferae achieved optimal growth at 27 30°C, and ceased to grow at 30 36°C. Colonies of P. citriasiana also grew faster on OA and MEA than those of G. citricarpa and G. mangiferae. Phyllosticta citriasiana appears to be a harmful pathogen of Citrus maxima, causing a tan spot on fruit, underlining the need for further surveys and research to determine its distribution and host range.
S2309	A. Ortega;V. N. Suárez-Santiago;J. Vila	2009	Two new species of Cortinarius collected under Quercus rotundifolia in the Mediterranean area of southern Spain	Fungal Diversity	36		89-99				Two new species of the genus Cortinarius (subgenus Phlegmacium) are proposed: C. inusitatus (sect. Claricolores; clade Phlegmacium, subclade Glaucopodes) and C. viscidoamarus (sect. Phlegmacium; clade Percomes). These species were collected in the holm oak forests of southern Spain. Morphological, macrochemical and molecular (internal transcribed spacer sequences) data of these species are given. Scanning (FESEM) micrographs of the spores and color pictures of the basidiomes in situ are provided.
S2379	A. J. L. Phillips;A. Alves	2009	Taxonomy, phylogeny, and epitypification of Melanops tulasnei, the type species of Melanops	Fungal Diversity	38		155-166				Melanops tulasnei was collected from dead twigs of Quercus ruber and identity was confirmed by comparing morphological features with the original description and with the neotype. A multi-gene phylogeny based on a portion of the 18S nuclear ribosomal gene, the nuclear rRNA cluster comprising the ITS region plus the D1/D2 variable domains of the LSU gene, together with the translation elongation factor 1-alpha gene and part of the beta-tubulin gene was constructed. In this phylogeny, M. tulasnei clustered with an isolate of Botryosphaeria quercuum near the root of the Botryosphaeriaceae. On account of the morphological and phylogenetic distinctions from other genera in the Botryosphaeriaceae, it is recommended that the genus Melanops should be reinstated. An epitype specimen of M. tulasnei was selected and ex-epitype cultures deposited in the public collection of CBS.
S2317	E. Sérusiaux;B. Goffinet;J. Miadlikowska;O. Vitikainen	2009	Taxonomy, phylogeny and biogeography of the lichen genus Peltigera in Papua New Guinea	Fungal Diversity	38		185-224				The lichen genus Peltigera is represented in Papua New Guinea by 15 species, including 6 described as new for science: P. cichoracea, P. didactyla, P. dolichorhiza, P. erioderma, P. extenuata, P. fimbriata sp. nov., P. granulosa sp. nov., P. koponenii sp. nov., P. montis-wilhelmii sp. nov., P. nana, P. oceanica, P. papuanorum sp. nov., P. sumatrana, P. ulcerata, and P. weberi sp. nov. Peltigera macra and P. tereziana var. philippinensis are reduced to synonymy with P. nana, whereas P. melanocoma is maintained as a species distinct from P. nana pending further studies. The status of several putative taxa referred to P. dolichorhiza s. lat. in the Sect. Polydactylon remains to be studied on a wider geographical scale and in the context of P. dolichorhiza and P. neopolydactyla. The phylogenetic affinities of all but one regional species (P. extenuata) are studied based on inferences from ITS (nrDNA) sequence data, in the context of a broad taxonomic sampling within the genus. A key to all species is provided and available data on their ecology and general distribution are discussed. The species P. canina, P. horizontalis, P. laciniata, P. malacea, P. polydactylon and P. tomentosa are excluded from the lichen checklist of Papua New Guinea. All lichenicolous fungi observed on Peltigera thalli in Papua New Guinea are listed.
S516	D. E. L. Cooke;A. Drenth;J. M. Duncan;G. Wagels;C. M. Brasier	2000	A molecular phylogeny of Phytophthora and related Oomycetes	Fungal Genetics and Biology	30	1	17-32	10.1006/fgbi.2000.1202			Phylogenetic relationships among 50 Phytophthora species and between Phytophthora and other oomycetes, were examined on the basis of the ITS sequences of genomic rDNA. Phytophthora grouped with Pythium, Peronospora, and Halophytophthora, distant from genera in the Saprolegniales. Albugo was intermediate between these two groups. Unlike Pythium, Phytophthora was essentially monophyletic, all but three species forming a cluster of eight clades. Two clades contained only species with non-papillate sporangia. The other six clades included either papillate and semi-papillate, or semi-papillate and non-papillate types, transcending traditional morphological groupings, which are evidently not natural assemblages. Peronospora was related to P. megakarya and P. palmivora and appears to be derived from a Phytophthora that has both lost the ability to produce zoospores and become an obligate biotroph. Three other Phytophthoras located some distance from the main Phytophthora-Peronospora cluster and probably represent one or more additional genera.
S484	D. M. Geiser;J. W. Dorner;B. W. Horn;J. W. Taylor	2000	The phylogenetics of mycotoxin and sclerotium production in Aspergillus flavus and Aspergillus oryzae	Fungal Genetics and Biology	31	3	169-179	10.1006/fgbi.2000.1215		aflatoxin; Aspergillus section Flavi; cyclopiazonic acid; cryptic species; gene genealogies	Aspergillus flavus is a common filamentous fungus that produces aflatoxins and presents a major threat to agriculture and human health. Previous phylogenetic studies of A. flavus have shown that it consists of two subgroups, called groups I and II, and morphological studies indicated that it consists of two morphological groups based on sclerotium size, called S and L. The industrially important non-aflatoxin producing fungus A. oryzae is nested within group I. Three different gene regions, including part of a gene involved involved in aflatoxin biosynthesis (omt12), were sequenced in 33 S and L strains of A. flavus collected from various regions around the world, along with three isolates of A. oryzae, and two isolates of A. parasiticus that were used as outgroups. The production of B and G aflatoxins and cyclopiazonic acid was analyzed in the A. flavus isolates, and each isolate was identified as S or L based on sclerotium size. Phylogenetic analysis of all three genes confirmed the inference that group I and group II represent a deep divergence within A. flavus. Most group I strains produced B aflatoxins to some degree, and none produced G aflatoxins. Four out of six group II strains produced both B and G aflatoxins. All group II isolates were of the S sclerotium phenotype, whereas group I strains consisted of both S and L isolates. Based on the omt12 gene region, phylogenetic structure in sclerotium phenotype and aflatoxin production was evident within group I. Some non-aflatoxin producing isolates of group I had an omt12 allele that was identical to that found in isolates of A. oryzae.
S495	A. P. Rehmany;J. R. Lynn;M. Tör;E. B. Holub;J. L. Beynon	2000	A comparison of Peronospora parasitica (downy mildew) isolates from Arabidopsis thaliana and Brassica oleracea using amplified fragment length polymorphism and fingerprint and internal transcribed spacer 1 sequence analyses	Fungal Genetics and Biology	30	2	95–103	10.1006/fgbi.2000.1216    		phylogenetic tree; Peronosporales; oomycete	Amplified fragment length polymorphism (AFLP) fingerprints and internal transcribed spacer 1 (ITS1) sequences from 27 Peronospora parasitica isolates (collected from Arabidopsis thaliana or Brassica oleracea), 5 Albugo candida isolates (from the same hosts and from Capsella bursa-pastoris), and 1 Bremia lactucae isolate (from Lactuca sativa) were compared. The AFLP analysis divided the isolates into five groups that correlated with taxonomic species and, in most cases, with host origin. The only exception was a group consisting of A. candida isolates from both B. oleracea and C. bursa-pastoris. ITS1 sequence analysis divided the isolates into the same five groups, demonstrated the divergence between P. parasitica isolates from A. thaliana and B. oleracea, and, using previously published ITS1 sequences, clearly showed the relationship between A. candida isolates from different hosts. 
S745	K. C. Ehrlich;B. G. Montalbano;P. J. Cotty	2003	Sequence comparison of aflR from different Aspergillus species provides evidence for variability in regulation of aflatoxin production	Fungal Genetics and Biology	38	1	63-74	10.1016/S1087-1845(02)00509-1		Aflatoxin; Aspergillus; aflR; aflJ; Transcription regulation; Phylogenetics; PEST domains; PacC; AreA; BrlA	Aflatoxin contamination of foods and feeds is a world-wide agricultural problem. Aflatoxin production requires expression of the biosynthetic pathway regulatory gene, aflR, which encodes a Cys6Zn2-type DNA-binding protein. Homologs of aflR from Aspergillus nomius, bombycis, parasiticus, flavus, and pseudotamarii were compared to investigate the molecular basis for variation among aflatoxin-producing taxa in the regulation of aflatoxin production. Variability was found in putative promoter consensus elements and coding region motifs, including motifs involved in developmental regulation (AbaA, BrlA), regulation of nitrogen source utilization (AreA), and pH regulation (PacC), and in coding region PEST domains. Some of these elements may affect expression of aflJ, a gene divergently transcribed from aflR, that also is required for aflatoxin accumulation. Comparisons of phylogenetic trees obtained with either aligned aflR intergenic region sequence or coding region sequence and the observed divergence in regulatory features among the taxa provide evidence that regulatory signals for aflatoxin production evolved to respond to a variety of environmental stimuli under differential selective pressures. Phylogenetic analyses also suggest that isolates currently assigned to the A. flavus morphotype SBG represent a distinct species and that A. nomius is a diverse paraphyletic assemblage likely to contain several species.
S1062	T. Y. James;S. R. Liou;R. Vilgalys	2004	Evolution and genomic architecture of the A and B mating-type genes from the tropical oyster mushroom, Pleurotus djamor	Fungal Genetics and Biology							In most heterothallic mushroom species, inbreeding is avoided by an incompatibility system determined by two loci (the A and B mating-type loci). The wood decay genus Pleurotus may be atypical because more mating-types are found at the B locus than the A locus- the opposite pattern than observed for most other mushroom species. In this study we investigated the genetic structure of the A and B mating-type loci in Pleurotus by sequencing cosmids containing mating-type gene homologues from the pantropical species P. djamor. The cosmids were isolated using a positional cloning method exploiting conserved gene order between the mating-type genes and more conserved genes having no function in mating (mitochondrial intermediate peptidase and CLA4). The sequences from the mating-type loci suggest that the types of genes responsible for mating-type determination in P. djamor are the same as in the model mushroom species, namely homeodomain transcription factors and pheromone receptors. Three pheromone receptors were detected in a single isolate of P. djamor; it is possible there are more. However, only one pair of homeodomain genes was found in the A mating-type region. Although additional, undetected homeodomain genes may occur in the P. djamor genome, it is hypothesized that the A mating-type locus of P. djamor is comprised of only one homeodomain pair, in part explaining the lower number of A mating-types relative to the two or more pairs found in the model species.
S1411	I. Druzhinina;A. G. Kopchinskiy;M. Komon;J. Bissett;G. Szakacs;C. P. Kubicek	2005	An oligonucleotide barcode for species identification on Trichoderma and Hypocrea	Fungal Genetics and Biology	42		813-828				One of the biggest obstructions to studies on Trichoderma has been the incorrect and confused application of species names to isolates used in industry, biocontrol of plant pathogens and ecological surveys, thereby making the comparison of results questionable. Here we provide a convenient, on-line method for the quick molecular identification of Hypocrea/Trichoderma at the genus and species levels based on an oligonucleotide barcode: a diagnostic combination of several oligonucleotides (hallmarks) specifically allocated within the internal transcribed spacer 1 and 2 (ITS1 and 2) sequences of rDNA repeat. The barcode was developed on the basis of 979 sequences of 88 vouchered species which displayed in total 135 ITS1 and 2 haplotypes. Oligonucleotide sequences which are constant in all known ITS1 and 2 of Hypocrea/Trichoderma but different in closely related fungal genera, were used to define genus specific hallmarks. The library of species-, clade- and genus-specific hallmarks is stored in the MySQL database and integrated in the TrichOKey v. 1.0 - barcode sequence identification program with the web interface located on www.isth.info. TrichOKey v. 1.0 identifies 75 single species, 5 species pairs and 1 species triplet. Verification of the DNA-barcode was done by a blind test on 53 unknown isolates of Trichoderma, collected in Central and South America. The obtained results were in a total agreement with phylogenetic identification based on tef1 (large intron), NCBI BLAST of vouchered records and postum morphological analysis. We conclude that oligonucleotide barcode is a powerful tool for the routine identification of Hypocrea/Trichoderma species and should be useful as a complement to traditional methods
S1593	M. Groenewald;J. Z. Groenewald;T. C. Harrington;E. C. A. Abeln;P. W. Crous	2006	Mating type gene analysis in apparently asexual Cercospora species is suggestive of cryptic sex	Fungal Genetics and Biology							The genus Cercospora consists of numerous important, apparently asexual plant pathogens. We designed degenerate primers from homologous sequences in related species to amplify part of the C. apii, C. apiicola, C. beticola, C. zeae-maydis and C. zeina mating type genes. Chromosome walking was used to determine the full length mating type genes of these species. Primers were developed to amplify and sequence homologous portions of the mating type genes of additional species. Phylogenetic analyses of these sequences revealed little variation among members of the C. apii complex, whereas C. zeae-maydis and C. zeina were found to be dissimilar. The presence of both mating types in approximately even proportions in C. beticola, C. zeae-maydis and C. zeina populations, in contrast to single mating types in C. apii (MAT1) and C. apiicola (MAT2), suggests that a sexual cycle may be active in some of these species.
S1755	M. Göker;H. Voglmayr;A. Riethmüller;F. Oberwinkler	2007	How do obligate parasites evolve? A multi-gene phylogenetic analysis of downy mildews	Fungal Genetics and Biology	44		105-122				Plant parasitism has independently evolved as a nutrition strategy in both true fungi and Oomycetes (stramenopiles). A large number of species within phytopathogenic Oomycetes, the so-called downy mildews, are defined as obligate biotrophs since they have not, to date, been cultured on any artificial medium. Other genera like Phytophthora and Pythium can in general be cultured on standard or non-standard agar media. Within all three groups there are many important plant pathogens responsible for severe economic losses as well as damage to natural ecosystems. Although they are important model systems to elucidate the evolution of obligate parasites, the phylogenetic relationships between these genera have not been clearly resolved. Based on the most comprehensive sampling of downy mildew genera to date and a representative sample of Phytophthora subgroups, we inferred the phylogenetic relationships from a multi-gene dataset containing both coding and non-coding nuclear and mitochondrial loci. Phylogenetic analyses were conducted under several optimality criteria and the results were largely consistent between all the methods applied. Strong support is achieved for monophyly of a clade comprising both the genus Phytophthora and the obligate biotrophic species. The facultatively parasitic genus Phytophthora is shown to be at least partly paraphyletic. Monophyly of a cluster nested within Phytophthora containing all obligate parasites is strongly supported. Within the obligate biotrophic downy mildews, four morphologically or ecologically well-defined subgroups receive statistical support: (1) A cluster containing all species with brownish-violet conidiosporangia, i.e., the genera Peronospora and Pseudoperonospora; (2) a clade comprising the genera with vesicular to pyriform haustoria (Basidiophora, Benua, Bremia, Paraperonospora, Plasmopara, Plasmoverna, Protobremia); (3) a group containing species included in Hyaloperonospora and Perofascia which almost exclusively infect Brassicaceae; (4) a clade including the grass parasites Viennotia oplismeni and Graminivora graminicola. Phylogenetic relationships between these four clades are not clearly resolved, and neither is the position of Sclerospora graminicola within the downy mildews. Character analysis indicates an evolutionary scenario of gradually increasing adaptation to plant parasitism in Peronosporales and that at least the most important of these adaptive steps occurred only once, including major host shifts within downy mildews.
S1747	A. J. Powell;D. J. Jacobson;D. O. Natvig	2007	Ancestral polymorphism and linkage disequilbrium at the het-6 region in pseudohomothallic Neurospora tetrasperma	Fungal Genetics and Biology							In species of Neurospora, non-self recognition is mediated by at least 11 heterokaryon (het) incompatibility loci. Previously, we identified ancient allelic variation at het-c in pseudohomothallic N. tetrasperma, which confirmed outcrossing in this species. Here, we report distinct ancestral alleles at het-6 and un-24, two closely linked genes with het incompatibility function in N. crassa. The pattern of variation at het-6 and un-24 in N. tetrasperma is similar to that observed for N. crassa, where two ancestral allele specificities exist for each locus, Oak Ridge (het-6OR, un-24OR) and Panama (het-6PA, un-24PA). Only het-6OR/un-24OR and het-6PA/un-24PA allele combinations have been observed. The absence of recombinant haplotypes (e.g., het-6OR/un-24PA) appears to derive from an ancestral chromosomal rearrangement that limits recombination. Allelic variation at this het locus in N. tetrasperma provides further evidence of outcrossing in this predominantly selfing organism and indicates that selection maintains allelic diversity at het loci.
S2041	R. M. Andrie;C. L. Schoch;R. Hedges;J. W. Spatafora;L. M. Ciuffetti	2008	Homologs of ToxB, a host-selective toxin gene from Pyrenophora tritici-repentis, are present in the genome of sister-species Pyrenophora bromi and other members of the Ascomycota	Fungal Genetics and Biology	45		363-77				Pyrenophora tritici-repentis requires the production of host-selective toxins (HSTs) to cause the disease tan spot of wheat, including Ptr ToxA, Ptr ToxB, and Ptr ToxC. Pyrenophora bromi, the species most closely related to P. tritici-repentis, is the causal agent of brown leaf spot of bromegrass. Because of the relatedness of P. bromi and P. tritici-repentis, we investigated the possibility that P. bromi contains sequences homologous to ToxA and/or ToxB, the products of which may be involved in its interaction with bromegrass. Multiplex polymerase chain reaction (PCR) revealed the presence of ToxB-like sequences in P. bromi and high-fidelity PCR was used to clone several of these loci, which were subsequently confirmed to be homologous to ToxB and named PbToxB. Additionally, Southern analysis revealed PbToxB to have a multicopy nature similar to ToxB. A combination of phylogenetic and Southern analyses revealed that the distribution of ToxB extends further into the Pleosporaceae, and a search of available fungal genomes identified a distant homolog in Magnaporthe grisea, causal agent of rice blast. Thus, unlike most other described HSTs, ToxB homologs are present across a broad range of plant pathogenic ascomycetes, suggesting its presence in an early ancestor of the Ascomycota.
S2443	T. Mullineux;G. Hausner	2009	Evolution of rDNA ITS1 and ITS2 sequences and RNA secondary structures within members of the fungal genera Grosmannia and Leptographium	Fungal Genetics and Biology	46	11	855-867	10.1016/j.fgb.2009.08.001			The two internal transcribed spacers (ITS) of the nuclear ribosomal (r) DNA tandem repeat were examined in ophiostomatoid fungi belonging to the genera Grosmannia and Leptographium and closely related taxa. Although the DNA sequence of the ITS region evolves rapidly, core features of the RNA secondary structure of the ITS1 and ITS2 segments are conserved. The results demonstrate that structural conservation of GC-rich helical regions is facilitated primarily through compensatory base changes (CBCs), hemi-CBCs, and compensating insertions/deletions (indels), although slippage of the RNA strand is potentially an additional mechanism for maintaining basepairing interactions. The major conclusion of the structural analysis of both ITS segments is that two factors appear to be involved in limiting the type of changes observed: a high GC bias for both ITS1 and ITS2 and structural constraints at the RNA level.
S2520	J. Diéguez-Uribeondo;M. A. García;L. Cerenius;E. Kozubíková;I. Ballesteros;C. Windels;J. Weiland;H. Kator;K. Söderhäll;M. P. Martín	2009	Phylogenetic relationships among plant and animal parasites, and saprotrophs in Aphanomyces (Oomycetes)	Fungal Genetics and Biology	46	5	365-376	10.1016/j.fgb.2009.02.004			Molecular phylogenetic relationships among 12 species of Aphanomyces de Bary (Oomycetes) were analyzed based on 108 ITS sequences of nuclear rDNA. Sequences used in the analyses belonged to the major species currently available in pure culture and GenBank. Bayesian, maximum likelihood, and maximum parsimony analyses support that Aphanomyces constitutes a monophyletic group. Three independent lineages were found: (i) plant parasitic, (ii) animal parasitic, and (iii) saprotrophic or opportunistic parasitic. Sexual reproduction appeared to be critical in plant parasites for survival in soil environments while asexual reproduction seemed to be advantageous for exploiting specialization in animal parasitism. Repeated zoospore emergence seems to be an advantageous property for both plant and animal parasitic modes of life. Growth in unspecific media was generally faster in saprotrophs compared with parasitic species. A number of strains and GenBank sequences were found to be misidentified. It was confirmed molecularly that A. piscicida and A. invadans appear to be conspecific, and found that A. iridis and A. euteiches are closely related, if not the same, species. This study has shown a clear evolutionary separation between Aphanomyces species that are plant parasites and those that parasitize animals. Saprotrophic or opportunistic species formed a separate evolutionary lineage except A. stellatus whose evolutionary position has not yet been resolved.
S2018	A. Y. Rossman;D. F. Farr;G. Platas;G. Newcombe	2008	Hydropisphaera fungicola Rossman, Farr & Newcombe, sp. nov	Fungal Planet	24						A new species of fungi was discovered that parasitizes Ulocladium in association with Melampsora rust on decaying leaves of Populus trichocarpa in Idaho. The fungus is described as a new species of Hydropisphaera in the ascomycete order Hypocreales in the family Bionectriaceae. This new species of Hydropisphaera has the following characteristics: ascomata subglobose to globose, 310-420 ∞Êm diam ™~ 280-350 ∞Êm high, with faint to distinct flattened, apex, 140-210 um diam. Ascospores 8.9-10.6 ™~ 4.3-5.9 ∞Êm, short fusiform, one-septate, faintly striate. An Acremonium-like anamorph is produced in dual culture.
S1216	S. H. Wu;Z. H. Yu;Y. C. Dai;C. T. Chen;C. H. Su;L. C. Chen;W. C. Hsu;G. Y. Hwang	2004	Taiwanfungus, polypore new genus	Fungal Science	19	3-4	109-116				Taiwanfungus Sheng H. Wu, Z.H. Yu, Y.C. Dai & C.H. Su is proposed as a new genus of lignicolous polypore, and Ganoderma comphoratum M. Zang & C.H. Su is designated as its generic type. New combinations for two species of Taiwanfungus are presented: T. camphoratus (M. Zang & C.H. Su) Sheng H. Wu, Z.H. Yu, Y.C. Dai & C.H. Su, and T. salmoneus (T.T. Chang & W.N. Chou) Sheng H. Wu, Z.H. Yu, Y.C. Dai & C.H. Su. Taiwanfungus camphoratus is known in Taiwan as "niu-chang-chih". Morphological features of this new genus mostly resemble Antrodia and Antrodiella among polypore genera. Phylogenetic analysis based on sequence data derived from LSU rDNA indicates that Taiwanfungus camphoratus neither close to Antrodia, nor to Antrodiella. Taiwanfungus camphoratus is endemic to Taiwan, and known only occur on trunk of Cinnamomum kanehirai Hay. This fungus species is well known by its medicinal uses and high economic value. Taiwanfungus camphoratus was first named Ganoderma comphoratum in 1990. Antrodia cinnamomea T.T. Chang & W.N. Chou was presented for the same species in 1995. Antrodia camphorata (Zang & Su) Sheng H. Wu, Ryvarden & T.T. Chang, new combination proposed in 1977 based on Ganoderma comphoratum, has then been widely adopted.
S606	K. Voigt;J. Wöstemeyer	2001	Phylogeny and origin of 82 zygomycetes from all 54 genera of the Mucorales and Mortierellales based on combined analysis of actin and translation elongation factor EF-1α genes	Gene	270	1-2	113-120	10.1016/S0378-1119(01)00464-4		Protein-coding genes; rDNA; Molecular evolution; Morphology; Family structure; Natural systematics	True fungi (Eumycota) are heterotrophic eukaryotic microorganisms encompassing ascomycetes, basidiomycetes, chytridiomycetes and zygomycetes. The natural systematics of the latter group, Zygomycota, are very poorly understood due to the lack of distinguishing morphological characters. We have determined sequences for the nuclear-encoded genes actin (act) from 82 zygomycetes representing all 54 currently recognized genera from the two zygomycetous orders Mucorales and Mortierellales. We also determined sequences for translation elongation factor EF-1α (tef) from 16 zygomycetes (total of 96,837 bp). Phylogenetic analysis in the context of available sequence data (total 2,062 nucleotide positions per species) revealed that current classification schemes for the mucoralean fungi are highly unnatural at the family and, to a large extent, at the genus level. The data clearly indicate a deep, ancient and distinct dichotomy of the orders Mucorales and Mortierellales, which are recognized only in some zygomycete systems. Yet at the same time the data show that two genera – Umbelopsis and Micromucor – previously placed within the Mortierellales on the basis of their weakly developed columella (a morphological structure of the sporangiophore well-developed within all Mucorales) are in fact members of the Mucorales. Phylogenetic analyses of the encoded amino acid sequences in the context of homologues from eukaryotes and archaebacterial outgroups indicate that the Eumycota studied here are a natural group but provide little or no support for the monophyly of either zygomycetes, ascomycetes or basidiomycetes. The data clearly indicate that a complete revision of zygomycete natural systematics is necessary.
S2032	M. Zhong;T. H. Struck;K. M. Halanych	2008	Phylogenetic information from three mitochondrial genomes of Terebelliformia (Annelida) worms and duplication of the methionine tRNA	Gene							Mitochondrial genomes have been useful for inferring animal phylogeny across a wide range of clades, however they are still poorly sampled in some animal taxa, limiting our knowledge of mtDNA evolution. For example, despite being one of the most diverse animal phyla, only 5 complete annelid mitochrondial genomes have been published. To address this paucity of information, we obtained complete mitochondrial genomic sequences from Pista cristata (Terebellidae) and Terebellides stroemi (Trichobranchidae) as well as one nearly complete mitochondrial genome from Eclysippe vanelli (Ampharetidae). These taxa are within Terebelliformia (Annelida), which include spaghetti worms, icecream cone worms and their relatives. In contrast to the 37 genes found in most bilaterian metazoans, we recover 38 genes in the mitochondrial genomes of T. stroemi and P. cristata due to the presence of a second methionine tRNA (trnM). Interestingly, the two trnMs are located next to each other and are possibly a synapomorphy of these two taxa. The E. vanelli partial mitochondrial genome lacks this additional trnM at the same position, but it may be present in the region not sampled. Compared to other annelids, gene orders of these three mitochondrial genomes are generally conserved except for the atp6-mSSU region. Phylogenetic analyses reveal that mtDNA data strongly supports a Trichobranchidae/Terebellidae clade.
S2339	T. Yokogawa;T. Yahara	2009	Mitochondrial phylogeny certified PGL (Paternal Genome Loss) is of single origin and haplodiploidy sensu stricto (arrhenotoky) did not evolve from PGL in the scale insects (Hemiptera: Coccoidea)	Genes and Genetic Systems	84	1	57-66	10.1266/ggs.84.57			In some arthropods, paternal chromosomes are inactivated or eliminated in adult males and are not transmitted to offspring by sperm. This unique chromosome system is called paternal genome loss (PGL). In scale insects (Hemiptera; superfamily Coccoidea), PGL is widespread and three types of PGL have been identified. The questions as to whether PGL is of single origin or of multiple origins, and whether PGL is evolved to haplodiploidy or derived from diplodiploidy such as XX-XO have remained areas of controversy. Preliminary phylogenetic analyses using nuclear ribosomal DNA of 495 nucleotide sites failed to provide conclusive answers to these questions. Here we report a highly-resolved phylogeny of scale insects based on 1,229 nucleotide sites from the mitochondrial genes (COI and COII). The paraphyly of Archaeococcoidea and the monophyly of Neococcoidea are strongly supported by Bayesian posterior probabilities p=0.99 and 1.00, respectively. These two hypotheses are supported also by maximum likelihood bootstrap probabilities BP=79.9 and 99.4%, respectively. The relationships among families of Neococcoidea are resolved, being supported by p=0.90-1.00 and BP=58.7-100%. Thus, the phylogenetic tree provides us a sound basis for reconstructing the evolutionary history of PGL in scale insects. Such results have demonstrated that (1) the common ancestor of scale insects was diplodiploidy of the XX-XO sex determination, (2) PGL has a single origin from XX-XO in the common ancestor of Neococcoidea, and (3) haplodiploidy was derived from XX-XO, but not from PGL. These results support the theories arguing that PGL is an evolutionary stable state.
S909	G. Caetano-Anollés;D. Caetano-Anollés	2003	An evolutionarily structured universe of protein architecture	Genome Research	13		1563-1571	10.1101/gr.1161903			Protein structural diversity encompasses a finite set of architectural designs. Embedded in these topologies are evolutionary histories that we here uncover using cladistic principles and measurements of protein-fold usage and sharing. The reconstructed phylogenies are inherently rooted and depict histories of protein and proteome diversification. Proteome phylogenies showed two monophyletic sister-groups delimiting Bacteria and Archaea, and a topology rooted in Eucarya. This suggests three dramatic evolutionary events and a common ancestor with a eukaryotic-like, gene-rich, and relatively modern organization. Conversely, a general phylogeny of protein architectures showed that structural classes of globular proteins appeared early in evolution and in defined order, the alpha/beta class being the first. While most ancestral folds shared a common architecture of barrels or interleaved beta-sheets and alpha-helices, many were clearly derived, such as polyhedral folds in the all-alpha class and beta-sandwiches, beta-propellers, and beta-prisms in all-beta proteins. We also describe transformation pathways of architectures that are prevalently used in nature. For example, beta-barrels with increased curl and stagger were favored evolutionary outcomes in the all-beta class. Interestingly, we found cases where structural change followed the alpha-to-beta tendency uncovered in the tree of architectures. We finally traced the total number of enzymatic functions associated with folds in the trees and showed there was a general link between structure and enzymatic function.
S2302	A. Vicentini;J. C. Barber;S. A. Aliscioni;L. M. Giussani;E. A. Kellogg	2008	The age of the grasses and clusters of origins of C4 photosynthesis	Global Change Biology	14	12	2963-2977	10.1111/j.1365-2486.2008.01688.x			At high temperatures and relatively low CO2 concentrations, plants can most efficiently fix carbon to form carbohydrates through C4 photosynthesis rather than through the ancestral and more widespread C3 pathway. Because most C4 plants are grasses, studies of the origin of C4 are intimately tied to studies of the origin of the grasses. The earliest origins of C4 may have been in the Oligocene, coinciding with a reduction in global CO2 levels, although at least one possible fossil calibration suggests that C4 is much more ancient. Multiple transitions between C3 and C4 photosynthesis occurred subsequent to the first appearance of C4. We present here a phylogeny of the grass family, based on nuclear and chloroplast genes, and calibrated with six fossils. We find that origins of the C4 pathway and reversals to C3 were significantly clustered in the Mid- to Late Miocene, correlating with global climate and following a C4 origin in the Oligocene. In the process of dating the origins of C4, we also were able to provide estimated times for other major events in grass evolution. We find that the common ancestor of the grasses (the crown node) originated in the upper Cretaceous. The common ancestor of maize and rice, and hence the younger boundary for the genome duplication that characterizes most grasses, lived at 52 +/- 8 Ma. The genome duplication could, however, be as old as the stem node of the grasses, 89-94 Ma.
S2279	H. Verbruggen;L. Tyberghein;K. Pauly;C. Vlaeminck;K. Van Nieuwenhuyze;W. H. C. F. Kooistra;F. Leliaert;O. De Clerck	2009	Macroecology meets macroevolution: Evolutionary niche dynamics in the seaweed Halimeda	Global Ecology and Biogeography	18	4	393-405	10.1111/j.1466-8238.2009.00463.x			Aim: Because of their broad distribution in geographic and ecological dimensions, seaweeds (marine macroalgae) offer great potential as models for marine biogeographic inquiry and exploration of the interface between macroecology and macroevolution. This study aims to characterize evolutionary niche dynamics in the common green seaweed genus Halimeda, use the observed insights to gain understanding of the biogeographic history of the genus, and predict habitats that can be targeted for discovery of species of special biogeographic interest. Location: Tropical and subtropical coastal waters. Methods: The evolutionary history of the genus is characterized using molecular phylogenetics and relaxed molecular clock analysis. Niche modeling is carried out with Maximum Entropy techniques and uses macroecological data derived from global satellite imagery. Evolutionary niche dynamics are inferred through application of ancestral character state estimation. Results: A nearly comprehensive molecular phylogeny of the genus was inferred from a six-locus dataset. Macroecological niche models showed that species' distribution ranges are considerably smaller than their potential ranges. We show strong phylogenetic signal in various macroecological niche features. Main conclusions: The evolution of Halimeda is characterized by conservatism for tropical, nutrient-depleted habitats, yet one section of the genus managed to invade colder habitats multiple times independently. Niche models indicate that the restricted geographic ranges of Halimeda species are not due to habitat unsuitability, strengthening the case for dispersal limitation. Niche models identified hotspots of habitat suitability of Caribbean species in the East Pacific Ocean. We propose that these hotspots be targeted for discovery of new species separated from their Caribbean siblings since the Pliocene rise of the Central American Isthmus.
S2404	S. K. Berke;A. R. Mahon;F. P. Lima;K. M. Halanych;D. S. Wethey;S. A. Woodin	2010	Range shifts and species diversity in marine ecosystem engineers: patterns and predictions for European sedimentary habitats	Global Ecology and Biogeography	19	2	223-232	10.1111/j.1466-8238.2009.00509.x			Aim: Ecosystem engineering polychaetes in the genus Diopatra are undergoing range shifts in Western Europe. We (i) assess the species diversity underlying these shifts, (ii) link biogeographic patterns to sea surface temperature patterns, and (iii) predict possible ecosystem-level outcomes of Diopatra's northward expansion. Location: Western Europe Methods: We use molecular phylogenetic and morphological evidence to assess species diversity and biogeographic ranges. Using regression tree analyses, we assess thermal limits for two Diopatra species. We compare biogeographic patterns to historical sea surface temperature patterns to draw links between range shifts and climate change. Finally, we review published data to predict potential ecological changes as Diopatra invades new habitats. Results: The native D. neapolitana range has contracted 130 km to the south. A cryptogenic species, Diopatra sp. A, has extended the northern limit of the genus 350 km to the southern Brittany peninsula. Both shifts can be explained by historical sea surface temperature anomalies. The Diopatra sp. A expansion is predicted to continue into the English Channel and the North Sea, introducing large tube structures to sheltered sedimentary habitats that currently lack such structures. Main conclusions: As climate change intensifies, the sediment-stabilizing Diopatra sp. A will invade habitats dominated by the bioturbating lugworm Arenicola marina. The resulting interaction between functionally different ecosystem engineers will likely cause ecological changes in Northern European coastal waters. Existing data for Diopatra species and arenicolids suggest that the diversity and biomass of macroalgae, vascular plants, infauna and epibenthic fauna may increase, while microbial activity may decrease. Net changes in productivity will depend on the relative rates of these changes.
S715	R. L. Verhoeven;S. Liede;M. E. Endress	2003	The tribal position of Fockea and Cibirhiza (Apocynaceae: Asclepiadoideae): evidence from pollinium structure and cpDNA sequence data	Grana	42	2	70-81	10.1080/00173130303932			The pollinium morphology of the two members of the Asclepiadoideae, tribe Fockeeae, Fockea Endl. and Cibirhiza Bruyns, has been studied in detail and compared with that of eight genera of Marsdenieae, the tribe in which Fockea and Cibirhiza were previously accommodated and thus their putative closest relatives, as well as nine genera of Asclepiadeae. Both Fockea and Cibirhiza have several morphological characteristics in common, the most important of which is the absence of well-developed caudicula, which distinguishes them from all other genera of Asclepiadoideae known. The pollinium structure of these two genera, however, differs significantly. Whereas the pollinium of Cibirhiza consists of single pollen grains and is covered by a pollinium wall, as is typical for other Asclepiadoideae, the pollinium of Fockea consists of tetrads and is not covered by a pollinium wall, a condition otherwise typical of Secamonoideae. Fockea , however, has only two pollinia per anther, as does Cibirhiza and all other Asclepiadoideae, whereas the Secamonoideae have four pollinia per anther. Sequence data from two intergenic spacers, trn T-L and trn L-F and the trn L intron of cpDNA was analyzed. The ingroup included three species of Fockea and one species of Cibirhiza . The outgroup taxa consisted of three representatives each of Periplocoideae, and Secamonoideae and 24 species of Asclepiadoideae, including representatives of all tribes, of which eight genera belong to Marsdenieae, as outgroups. The results of the DNA analysis provide strong support for Fockeeae as a monophyletic tribe, distinct from Marsdenieae and, to the rest of the Asclepiadoideae. With the exception of pollen data, all morphological and molecular evidence clearly support recognition of the tribe Fockeeae. The occurrence of two such significantly different types of pollinia structure - characters elsewhere in the family used to distinguish subfamilies - within the small tribe Fockeeae was unexpected, and can perhaps best be understood as yet another attestment to the basal position of the Fockeeae in the nascence of the Asclepiadoideae. 
S391	J. H. Li;A. L. Bogle;M. J. Donoghue	1999	Phylogenetic relationships in the Hamamelidoideae inferred from sequences of trn non-coding regions of chloroplast DNA	Harvard Papers in Botany	4	1	343-356		http://www.phylodiversity.net/donoghue/publications/MJD_papers/1999/088_Li_HarvPapBot99.pdf	Hamamelidoideae; Hamamelidaceae; phylogeny; chloroplast DNA; trnL-trnF intergenic spacer; trnL intron	Two non-coding regions of chloroplast DNA were used to examine phylogenetic relationships in the Hamamelidoideae (Hamamelidaceae). Sequences of trnL-trnF intergenic spacer and trnL intron were informative in resolving relationships among genera and at higher levels. Three major lineages are identified: the Corylopsis lineage, the Trichocladus lineage, and the Hamamelis lineage. Corylopsideae, Hamamelideae, and Dicoryphinae are found to be monophyletic; Loropetalinae and Eustigmateae appear to be paraphyletic, and Hamamelideae and Fothergilleae to be polyphyletic. These results are consistent with previous analyses based on nrDNA ITS sequences and the cpDNA matK gene. Morphological characters, such as apetaly, strap-shaped petal, and wind pollination, which have been used to define suprageneric groups, evolved independently in the three lineages.
S497	J. H. Li;A. L. Bogle;A. S. Klein;M. J. Donoghue	2000	Phylogeny and biogeography of Hamamelis (Hamamelidaceae)	Harvard Papers in Botany	5	1	171-178		http://www.phylodiversity.net/donoghue/publications/MJD_papers/2000/097_Li_HarvPapBot00.pdf	Hamamelis; biogeography; phylogeny; ITS; trnL-trnF spacer; matK; waxy	Interspecific relationships and molecular divergence within Hamamelis were studied based on sequences of the internal transcribed spacers (ITS) of nrDNA, trnL-trnF intergenic spacers and the matK gene of cpDNA, and the nuclear gene GBSSI (waxy). Phylogenies based on the four data sets were congruent and the combined analysis produced a well-supported pattern of relationship among the species. The North American species, Hamamelis virginiana, H. mexicana and H. vernalis, formed a robust clade with H. virginiana basal. This suggests that Hamamelis vernalis and H. mexicana are not relicts, as previously supposed. The Japanese species, Hamamelis japonica, is more closely related to the North American species than to the Chinese species, H. mollis, which is consistent with leaf morphological characters. This biogeographic pattern is congruent with that seen in several other plant groups and is consistent with a series of vicariance events possibly involving Beringian exchange between Asia and North America.
S1123	C. D. Bell;E. J. Edwards;S. T. Kim;M. J. Donoghue	2001	Dipsacales phylogeny based on chloroplast DNA sequences	Harvard Papers in Botany	6	2	481-499		http://www.phylodiversity.net/donoghue/publications/MJD_papers/2001/113_Bell_HarvardPapBot01.pdf	Dipsacales; Adoxaceae; Caprifoliaceae; Morinaceae; Dipsacaceae; Valerianaceae; phylogeny; chloroplast DNA	Eight new rbcL DNA sequences and 15 new sequences from the 5' end of the chloroplast ndhF gene were obtained from representative Dipsacales and outgroup taxa. These were analyzed in combination with previously published sequences for both regions. In addition, sequence data from the entire ndhF gene, the trnL-F intergenic spacer region, the trnL intron, the matK region, and the rbcL-atpB intergenic spacer region were collected for 30 taxa within Dipsacales. Phylogenetic relationships were inferred using maximum parsimony and maximum likelihood methods. Inferred tree topologies are in strong agreement with previous results from separate and combined analyses of rbcL and morphology, and confidence in most major clades is now very high. Concerning controversial issues, we conclude that Dipsacales in the traditional sense is a monophyletic group and that Triplostegia is more closely related to Dipsacaceae than it is to Valerianaceae. Heptacodium is only weakly supported as the sister group of the Caprifolieae (within which relationships remain largely unresolved), and the exact position of Diervilleae is uncertain. Within Morinaceae, Acanthocalyx is the sister group of Morina plus Cryptothladia. Dipsacales now provides excellent opportunities for comparative studies, but it will be important to check the congruence of chloroplast results with those based on data from other genomes.
S866	M. J. Donoghue;T. Eriksson;P. A. Reeves;R. G. Olmstead	2001	Phylogeny and Phylogenetic Taxonomy of Dipsacales, with special reference to Sinadoxa and Tetradoxa (Adoxaceae)	Harvard Papers in Botany	6	2	459-479		http://www.phylodiversity.net/donoghue/publications/MJD_papers/2001/112_MJD_HarvardPapBot01.pdf	Adoxaceae; Caprifoliaceae; Dipsacales; ITS; morphological characters; phylogeny; phylogenetic taxonomy; phylogenetic nomenclature; rbcL; Sinadoxa; Tetradoxa	To further clarify phylogenetic relationships within Dipsacales, we analyzed new and previously published rbcL sequences, alone and in combination with morphological data. We also examined relationships within Adoxaceae using rbcL and nuclear ribosomal internal transcribed spacer (ITS) sequences. We conclude from these analyses that Dipsacales comprise two major lineages: Adoxaceae and Caprifoliaceae (sensu Judd et al., 1994), which both contain elements of traditional Caprifoliaceae. Within Adoxaceae, the following relationships are strongly supported: (Viburnum, (Sambucus, (Sinadoxa, (Tetradoxa, Adoxa)))). Combined analyses of Caprifoliaceae yield the following: (Caprifolieae (Diervilleae (Linnaeeae (Morinaceae (Dipsacaceae (Triplostegia, Valerianaceae)))))). On the basis of these results we provide phylogenetic definitions for the names of several major clades. Within Adoxaceae, Adoxina refers to the clade including Sinadoxa, Tetradoxa, and Adoxa. This lineage is marked by herbaceous habit, reduction in the number of perianth parts, nectaries of multicellular hairs on the perianth, and bifid stamens. The clade including Morinaceae, Valerianaceae, Triplostegia, and Dipsacaceae is here named Valerina. Probable synapomorphies include herbaceousness, presence of an epicalyx (lost or modified in Valerianaceae), reduced endosperm, and distinctive chemistry, including production of monoterpenoids. The clade containing Valerina plus Linnaeeae we name Linnina. This lineage is distinguished by reduction to four (or fewer) stamens, by abortion of two of the three carpels, and possibly by supernumerary inflorescences bracts.
S1778	R. Neilson;W. Ye;C. M. G. Oliveira;J. Hübschen;R. T. Robbins;D. J. F. Brown;A. L. Szalanski	2004	Phylogenetic relationships of selected species of Longidoridae (Nematoda: Longidoridae) from North America inferred from 18S rDNA gene sequence data	Helminthologia	41		209-215				A phylogenetic analysis of 18S rDNA sequences was conducted to construct evolutionary trees and evaluate taxonomic relationships among Longidorus and Xiphinema nemotode species from North America. A multiple sequence alignment, including Californidorus cylindricaudatus as an outgroup, comprised of 1747 characters of which 1479 were constant, and 146 (8.4%) were parsimony informative.
S291	C. C. Austin	1995	Molecular and morphological evolution in South pacific scincid lizards: morphological conservatism and phylogenetic relationships of Papuan Lipinia (Scincidae)	Herpetologica	51	3	291-300		http://www.jstor.org/stable/3893035	Allozymes; Lipinia; Morphology; New Guinea; Phylogeny; Scincidae	I present allozyme data for five species of Lipinia (Reptilia: Scincidae) from the South Pacific. These data (1) support the resurrection of Lipinia rouxi as a distinct species in congruence with data from nontraditional morphological characters presented by Greer and Mys, (2) show a large degree of genetic divergence between species while data for traditional morphological characters show almost no differentiation, and (3) based on parsimony, support the phylogenetic hypothesis (((noctua, rouxi, pulchra) longiceps) leptosoma). Key words: Allozymes; Lipinia; Morphology; New Guinea; Phylogeny; Scincidae.
S289	A. Graybeal;D. C. Cannatella	1995	A new taxon of Bufonidae from Peru, with descriptions of two new species and a review of the phylogenetic status of supraspecific bufonid taxa	Herpetologica	51	2	105-131		http://www.jstor.org/stable/3892580	Anura; Bufonidae; Peru; Phylogenetic Options; Truebella	Two undescribed species from the eastern slopes of the Peruvian Andes exhibit synapomorphies indicating that they are sister taxa and members of the family Bufonidae. These are small toads that lack parotoid glands and digital webbing, and have partially fused epicoracoid cartilages. The clade formed by these species is named as a new, phylogenetically defined, taxon within Bufonidae: Truebella. The phylogenetic status of the supraspecific taxa within Bufonidae is reviewed; of 33 genera, only 12 have evidence of monophyly. Therefore, a purely phylogenetic taxonomy of Bufonidae would require elimination or redefinition of many taxon names. Although we do not take such action at this time, we see use of phylogenetic definitions of taxon names as an important goal for the future if the rich diversity of bufonids is to be more thoroughly understood. 
S847	J. A. Schulte Ii;J. P. Valladares;A. Larson	2003	Phylogenetic relationships within Iguanidae using molecular and morphological data and a phylogenetic taxonomy of iguanian lizards	Herpetologica							We present phylogenetic analyses of 42 new partial mitochondrial-DNA sequences in combination with 28 previously published sequences representing all eight subfamilies of the lizard family Iguanidae (sensu lato). These sequences include 1838 aligned positions (1013 parsimony informative for ingroup taxa) extending from the protein-coding gene ND1 (subunit one of NADH dehydrogenase) through the genes encoding tRNAIle, tRNAGln, tRNAMet, ND2 (NADH dehydrogenase subunit two), tRNATrp, tRNAAla, tRNAAsn, tRNACys, tRNATyr, to the protein-coding gene COI (subunit I of cytochrome c oxidase). These data, analyzed in combination with 67 previously published morphological characters, provide statistical support for monophyly of iguanid subfamilies Corytophaninae, Crotaphytinae, Hoplocercinae, Iguaninae, Oplurinae, and Phrynosomatinae. Monophyly is neither supported nor statistically rejected for iguanid subfamilies Polychrotinae and Tropidurinae. Polychrotinae* and Tropidurinae* may be recognized as metataxa, to denote the fact that evidence for their monophyly is equivocal, or replaced by recognizing as subfamilies constituent groups whose monophyly has stronger empirical support. A phylogenetically (non-ranked) based, statistically robust taxonomy of iguanian lizards is proposed. The Old World lizard clade, Acrodonta, is comprised of Chamaeleonidae and Agamidae* with the Agaminae, Amphibolurinae, Draconinae, Hydrosaurinae, Leiolepidinae, and Uromastycinae nested within Agamidae*. The predominately New World clade, Iguanidae, contains the groups Corytophaninae, Crotaphytinae, Hoplocercinae, Iguaninae, Oplurinae, Phrynosomatinae, Polychrotinae*, and Tropidurinae* with Anolis, Leiosaurini (composed of the Leiosaurinae and Enyaliinae), and Polychrus as the subgroups of Polychrotinae* and Leiocephalini, Liolaemini, and Tropidurini as the subgroups of Tropidurinae*.
S1337	S. Uwai;N. Yotsukura;Y. Serisawa;D. Muraoka;M. Hiraoka;K. Kogame	2006	Intraspecific genetic diversity of Undaria pinnatifida in Japan, based on the mitochondrial cox3 gene and the ITS1 of nrDNA	Hydrobiologia	553		345-356				The intraspecific genetic diversity of the kelp Undaria pinnatifida (Harvey) Suringar (Laminariales, Phaeophyceae) was investigated using DNA sequences of the mitochondrial cytochrome oxidase subunit 3 (cox3) gene and internal transcribed spacer 1 (ITS1) of nuclear ribosomal DNA in plants collected from 21 localities along the Japanese coast between 2001-2003. Morphological variation was also examined and compared with the genetic diversity. Cox3 analyses of 104 plants revealed 9 haplotypes (I-IX) that differed from each other by 1-7 bp (all synonymous substitutions). Haplotype I was distributed in Hokkaido and the northern Pacific coast of Honshu, while haplotype III was found along the Sea of Japan coast of Honshu. Other types were found along the central and southern coast of Honshu and the Inland Sea. ITS1 analyses of 39 plants revealed 0-1.7 % nucleotide differences, but plants from the Sea of Japan coast and northern Japan had similar sequences. The lower genetic differentiation along the Sea of Japan and northern coasts might be due to the recent establishment (after the middle of the last glacial period) of the Sea of Japan flora. The cox3 haplotype of cultivated plants was found in natural populations occurring close to cultivation sites (Naruto, Tokushima Pref., and Hokutan, Hyogo Pref.). This suggests that cultivated plants possibly escaped and spread or crossed with plants of natural populations. Morphological analyses of variation in 10 characters were conducted using 66 plants. The results showed no significant local variation owing to the wide variation in each population and did not support any forma previously described. No correlations between the morphological characters and cox3 haplotypes were detected.
S1021	D. B. Burt	2004	Plumage based phylogenetic analyses of the Merops bee-eaters	Ibis	146	3	481-49				I review previous systematic work on the family Meropidae and present phylogenetic hypotheses derived from my analyses of colour, pattern and shape variation in 30 plumage regions among species and subspecies in this family. Consistent patterns are seen across shallow portions of the trees. Uncertainty remains concerning the placement of several deep branches within this group's phylogeny. In particular, the phylogenetic placement of Meropogon forsteni and Merops breweri, M. ornatus, M. hirundineus and M. boehmi remains uncertain. The biogeographic patterns in the resultant trees are similar with either a Southeast Asian or African origin for the family, with most of the early diversification occurring in Africa, and with multiple independent subsequent invasions of non-African areas.
S344	M. J. Ramírez	1997	Revisión y filogenia de los géneros Ferrieria y Acanthoceto (Araneae: Anyphaenidae, Amaurobioidinae)	Iheringia. Série Zoologia	82		173-203		http://aracnologia.macn.gov.ar/biblio/Ramirez%201997%20Ferrieria%20Acanthoceto.pdf	Ferrieria; Acanthoceto; Anyphaenidae; Neotropical; Cladistics	The genera Ferrieria Tullgren and Acanthoceto Mello-Leitao are revised. Acanthoceto is diagnosed by the male abdominal prolongation above the anal tubercle. Seven South American species are included: Cayenna cinerea Tullgren, Clubiona acupicta Nicolet and Tomopisthes septentrionalis Berland are transferred to Acanthoceto, four new species are described, A. riogrande, A. pichi, A. marinas and A. Iadormida. Acanthoceto bryantae Caporiacco is transferred to Josa. Gayenna marginata Keyserling and Acanthoceto adelae Mello-Leitao are newly synonymized with Acanthoceto acupictus. Ferrieria is diagnosed by the large macrosetae on fore legs, combined with wrapped copulatory ducts and a short spine-like pulpal tibial retrolateral apophysis. Includes only Ferrieria echinata Tullgren, ffom South Chile and adjacent Argentina. Terupis Simon is newly synonymized withFerrieria, and Terupis bicolor Simon with Ferrieria echinata. A cladistic analysis of all Acanthoceto and Ferrierua species, plus eleven genera of Amaurobioidinae, Anyphaeninae and Malenellinae is made for 39 informative characters. Ferrieria is proposed to be the sister group of Acanthoceto, and relationships with other genera of Amaurobioidinae are discussed. 
S1048	P. t g The Irpcm Phytoplasma/Spiroplasma Working Team	2004	Candidatus Phytoplasma¡, a taxon for the wall-less non-helical prokaryotes colonizing plant phloem and insects	IJSEM Papers							The trivial name 'phytoplasmas' has been adopted to collectively name the wall-less non-helical prokaryotes colonizing plant phloem and insects, formerly known as mycoplasma-like organisms. Although the phytoplasmas have not yet been cultivated in vitro, phylogenetic analyses based on various conserved genes showed that they represent a distinct monophyletic clade within the class Mollicutes. It is proposed here to accommodate phytoplasmas within the genus 'Candidatus Phytoplasma' gen. nov. Given the diversity within ëCa. Phytoplasmaí, several subtaxa are needed to accommodate organisms which share less than 97.5% similarity among their 16S ribosomal DNA sequences. This paper describes the properties of 'Candidatus Phytoplasma', a taxon which includes the species ëCandidatus Phytoplasma aurantifoliaí (the prokaryote associated to witchesí broom disease of small-fruited acid lime), 'Ca. P. australiense' (associated with Australian grapevine yellows), 'Ca. P. fraxini' (associated with ash yellows), ëCa. P. japonicumí (associated with Japanese Hydrangea phyllody), ëCa. P. brasilienseí(associated with hibiscus witchesí broom in Brazil), ëCa. P. castaneae (associated with chestnut witches' broom in Korea), ëCa. P. asterisí (associated with aster yellows), 'Ca. P. mali' (associated with apple proliferation), 'Ca. P. phoenicium' (associated with almond lethal disease), 'Ca. P. trifolii' (associated with clover proliferation), 'Ca. P. cynodontis' (associated with Bermuda grass white leaf), 'Ca. P. ziziphi' (associated with jujube witchesí broom) and 7 species level taxa for which the Candidatus species has not been formally proposed yet (for the phytoplasmas associated with X-disease of peach, rice yellow dwarf, grapevine flavescence dorée, Central American coconut lethal yellows, Tanzanian lethal decline of coconut, Nigerian lethal decline of coconut and loofah witches' broom, respectively). Additional species are needed to accommodate organisms that, despite their 16S rRNA sequence being more than 97.5% similar to that of other ëCa. Phytoplasmaí species, are characterized by distinctive biological, phytopathological and genetic properties. These include ëCa. P. pyrií (associated with pear decline), 'Ca. P. prunorum' (associated with European stone fruit yellows), 'Ca. Phytoplasma spartii' (associated with spartium witchesí broom), ëCa. Phytoplasma rhamnií (associated with buckthorn witches' broom), 'Ca. Phytoplasma allocasuarinii' (associated with allocasuarina yellows) and two additional taxa for the elm yellows and the stolbur phytoplasmas, respectively. Conversely some organisms, despite their 16S rRNA sequence being less then 97.5% similar to that of any other 'Ca. Phytoplasma' species, are not presently described as Candidatus species due to their poor overall characterization.
S426	A. V. Z. Brower;R. DeSalle	1998	Patterns of mitochondrial versus nuclear DNA sequence divergence among nymphalid butterflies: the utility of wingless as a source of characters for phylogenetic inference	Insect Molecular Biology	7	1	73-82	10.1046/j.1365-2583.1998.71052.x		wingless; molecular systematics; COII,mtDNA; Nymphalidae; Lepidoptera	To investigate the utility of a region of wingless(wg) as a marker for molecular systematics, we compared wg sequences to mitochondrial COII sequences from twenty-two nymphalid butterfly taxa and one outgroup. Compositional characteristics of the two gene regions are compared, and their contributions to a cladogram inferred from the combined data set are assessed. Primarily due to its uniform base composition, wg appears to become saturated more slowly than mtDNA, although the two genes appear to be evolving at quite similar rates. We suggest that wg will be a useful source of characters for phylogenetic studies of butterflies, and perhaps other insect taxa, with divergence times up to 60 million years ago.
S669	A. Mitchell;F. A. H. Sperling;D. A. Hickey	2002	Higher-level phylogeny of mosquitoes (Diptera: Culicidae): mtDNA data support a derived placement for Toxorhynchites	Insect Systematics and Evolution	33	2	163-174	10.1163/187631202X00118	http://www.ingentaconnect.com/content/brill/ise/2002/00000033/00000002/art00003		We assess the potential of complete coding sequences of the mitochondrial cytochrome oxidase genes (COI and COII) and the intervening tRNA-Leucine gene for use in mosquito higher-level systematics, and apply this data to an outstanding question: the phylogenetic affinities of Toxorhynchites. Traditionally placed in its own subfamily and regarded as sister group to Culicinae, recent morphological data instead have suggested that this distinctive genus belongs well within the Culicinae. Published molecular systematic studies seemingly conflict with this new morphological data or are ambiguous. The mitochondrial gene data that we present show good potential for elucidating suprageneric relationships in Culicidae, and strongly support the placement of Toxorhynchites well within the Culicinae. Reexamination of published data sets suggests that there is no substantive conflict among data sets on this issue.
S1999	S. A. Belokobylskij;A. Zaldivar-Riverón;K. Maeto;A. G. Sáez	2008	Asian taxa of the parasitic wasp subfamily Betylobraconinae (Hymenoptera, Braconidae) with description of a new genus	Insect Systematics and Evolution							The taxonomy of the Asian genera of the subfamily Betylobraconinae, a small and understudied group within the hymenopteran family Braconidae, is revised. A new genus exclusive from the Asian region, Asiabregma gen. nov., containing three species (A. makiharai sp. nov., A. ryukyuensis sp. nov., and A. sulaensis (van Achterberg), comb. nov.) is described. One new species of Aulosaphobracon, A. striatus sp. nov. from Vietnam, and one of Facitorus, F. amamioshimus sp. nov. from Japan, are also described. Based on molecular phylogenetic analyses using COI mtDNA and 28S rRNA sequences, the three genera previously placed in the tribe Facitorini, Facitorus, Conobregma and Jannya, together with Asiabregma, are transferred to the rogadine tribe Yeliconini.
S2412	M. Kuhlman;E. Almeida;N. Laurenne;D. L. J. Quicke	2009	Molecular phylogeny and historical biogeography of the bee genus Colletes Latreille, 1802 (Hymenoptera: Apiformes: Colletidae), based on mitochondrial COI and nuclear 28S sequence data	Insect Systematics and Evolution	40	3	291-318	10.1163/139956009x12475840653733			A phylogenetic analysis of the intrageneric relationships within the bee genus Colletes using a combined data set of the mitochondrial cytochrome oxidase 1 (COI) and 28S sequences is presented and its implications for historical biogeography are investigated. We analysed 91 Colletes species from the entire range of distribution and 25 outgroup taxa. Eight different combinations of alignment parameters were used for the 28S data, and our combined data set comprised between 1801 and 1845 aligned nucleotides with COI contributing 339 informative bases and 28S between 318 and 360 informative sites. Our results corroborate the monophyly of about half of the Old World subgenera and show the need for a taxonomic re-delimitation of other groups currently accepted. The phylogenetic results confirm the South American origin of Colletes and multiple faunal exchange events between North America and Eurasia. The last continent colonized was Africa south of the Sahara, which experienced at least two independent invasions.
S1440	L. Zeng;M. W. Jacobs;B. J. Swalla	2006	Coloniality has evolved once in Stolidobranch Ascidians	Integrative and Comparative Biology							Tunicates exhibit a rich array of body plans and life history strategies. Colonial species typically consist of zooids embedded together in a common test and brood large larvae, while solitary species live singly and typically free-spawn eggs which develop into small larvae. Tunicates in the suborder Stolidobranchia contain both colonial and solitary species, as well as several species with intermediate morphologies. These include Œsocial‚ species, which are colonial but do not live embedded in a common test, and solitary species which brood or produce large larvae. We completed the most extensive phylogenetic analyses published to date in order to examine how many times coloniality has evolved within the Stolidobranchia, with full length18S rDNA and cytochrome oxidase b sequences of members of the families Molgulidae, Styelidae, Pyuridae, and Botryllidae. As shown previously by analyses from this lab, suborders Phlebobranchia and Stolidobranchia are sister groups, and the family Molgulidae falls out as a monophyletic group and should be raised to the subordinal level. In contrast to previous studies, the Styelids and Pyurids are separated into monophyletic groups by some of the analyses. We show a single clade within the family Styelidae (suborder Stolidobranchia) that contains three colonial (compound) species, the colonial (social) species Metandrocarpa taylori, as well as three solitary species. These results suggest that the ancestor of the Stolidobranchia suborder was solitary and that coloniality has evolved only once within this clade of ascidians. Furthermore, it suggests that the family Botryllidae is correctly classified as a genus within the Styelidae, not a separate family. Further in depth phylogenetic analyses of the remaining orders of ascidians will be necessary to understand the number of times that coloniality may have evolved within the tunicates.
S389	M. Zehnder;J. Mariaux	1999	Molecular systematic analysis of the order Proteocephalidea (Eucestoda) based on mitochondrial and nuclear rDNA sequences	International Journal for Parasitology	29	11	1841-1852	10.1016/s0020-7519(99)00122-8		Eucestoda; LsrRNA; Molecular systematics; Proteocephalidea; Proteocephalus; Phylogeny; 16S rRNA	Two ribosomal DNA sequences were used to infer phylogenetic relationships among the Eucestoda order Proteocephalidea. A 437 bp portion of the 16S mitochondrial and a 1149 bp 5' portion of the nuclear large sub-unit rRNA molecule were sequenced for 53 proteocephalidean cestodes (representing nine subfamilies and 22 genera) and for one outgroup species. Parsimony and distance-based analyses of the two databases, alone and combined, failed to support the monophyly of the two traditionally accepted families, of numerous subfamilies (with the exception of the Rudolphielliinae and Othinoscolescinae which were validated in our analysis) and of various genera, including the genus Nomimoscolex (Woodland), Ophiotaenia (La Rue) as well as the type genus Proteocephalus (Weinland). Palaearctic Proteocephalus species nevertheless constituted a well defined clade. The two genes globally yielded compatible results, however the nuclear ribosomal gene provided a better resolution of relations among Proteocephalidea.
S795	M. Dorris;M. E. Viney;M. L. Blaxter	2002	Molecular phylogenetic analysis of the genus Strongyloides and related nematodes	International Journal for Parasitology	32	12	1507-1517	10.1016/s0020-7519(02)00156-x		Strongyloides; Parastrongyloides; Rhabdias; Rhabditophanes ribosomal RNA; Molecular phylogeny	Strongyloides spp., parasitic nematodes of humans and many other terrestrial vertebrates, display an unusual heterogonic lifecycle involving alternating parasitic and free-living adult reproductive stages. A number of other genera have similar lifecycles, but their relationships to Strongyloides have not been clarified. We have inferred a phylogeny of 12 species of Strongyloides, Parastrongyloides, Rhabdias and Rhabditophanes using small subunit ribosomal RNA gene (SSU rDNA) sequences. The lineage leading to Strongyloides appears to have arisen within parasites of terrestrial invertebrates. Inferred lifecycle evolution was particularly dynamic within these nematodes. Importantly, the free-living Rhabditophanes sp. KR3021 is placed within a clade of parasitic taxa, suggesting that this species may represent a reversion to a non-parasitic lifecycle. Species within the genus Strongyloides are very closely related, despite the disparity of host species parasitised. The highly pathogenic human parasite Strongyloides fuelleborni kelleyi is not supported as a subspecies of the primate parasite S. fuelleborni fuelleborni, but is most likely derived from a local zoonotic source.
S893	A. K. Knutsen;M. Torp;A. Holst-Jensen	2003	Phylogenetic analyses of Fusarium species in the section Sporotrichiella based on partial sequences of the translation elongation factor-1 alpha gene	International Journal of Food Microbiology	95	3	287-295.	10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2003.12.007			Phylogenetic relationships between four Fusarium species were studied using parts of the nuclear EF-1a-gene as a phylogenetic marker. Sequences from12 isolates of F. poae, 10 isolates of F. sporotrichioides and12 isolates of F. langsetiae yielded 4, 5 and 5 genotypes respectively. In addition we included one isolate of F. kyushuense. The aligned sequences were subjected to neighbor-joining, maximum parsimony and maximum likelihood analyses. The results from the different analyses were highly concordant due to a harmonic dataset. A likelihood test on all the topologies revealed that none of them could be rejected. All the analyses support the suggestion of F. langsethiae as a separate taxon in the Fusarium section Sporotrichiella. They also reveal that F. langsethiae is more related to F. sporotrichioides than to F. poae, and that F. kyushuense is more related to F. poae than to F. sporotrichioides although morphological characters could lead you to believe the opposite.
S918	L. Niessen;H. Schmidt;R. F. Vogel	2004	The use of tri5 gene sequences for PCR detection and taxonomy of trichothecene-producing species in the Fusarium section Sporotrichiella	International Journal of Food Microbiology	95	3	305-319	10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2003.12.009			Purified DNA from representative isolates each of Fusarium poae, F. sporotrichioides, F. kyushuense and the newly described F. langsethae was used to amplify a 658 bp fragment from the trichodiene synthase (tri5) gene of these fungi using the gene specific primer pair Tox5-1/Tox5-2. Fragments obtained were isolated and sequenced. The nucleotide sequences were aligned to each other. Sequence analysis revealed high similarity between F. sporotrichioides and F. langsethae (98.7 %). Similarity between the latter species and F. poae was lower (90.9 %). Phylogenetic analysis of the aligned sequences with the tri5 sequence of Stachybotrys chartarum as outgroup revealed a clear separation between F. poae and the group of F. sporotrichioides and F. langsethae sp. nov. Within this subgroup, two species were supported by high boostrap values.Oligonucleotide primers were designed from the aligned sequences and used as reverse primers in combination with the gene specific forward primer Tox5-1. The newly designed reverse primers enabled amplification of a 400 bp fragment when purified DNA from F. poae and F. sporotrichioides were used as template, respectively. Two different reverse primers designed for F. langsethae sp. nov. both could not differentiate this species from F. sporotrichioides but from F. poae and F. kyushuense. All primer pairs were tested for cross reactivity with 25 fungal species and subspecies capable of producing trichothecenes with no unspecific amplification found. The PCR assays developed were applied in analysis of artificially and naturally infected cereal grain. The species were selectively detected by the respective primers. In naturally infected oats, F. langsethae sp. nov. was identified by the combination of two PCR assays.
S418	N. Wikstrm;P. Kenrick	1997	Phylogeny of Lycopodiaceae (Lycopsida) and the relationships of Phylloglossum drummondii Kunze based on rbcL sequences	International Journal of Plant Sciences	158	6	862-871	10.1086/297501			A cladistic analysis based on rbcL sequences from a representative sample of 12 species yields a single most parsimonious tree that supports monophyly of Lycopodiaceae, Lycopodium and Lycopodiella. Huperzia is resolved as paraphyletic to the morphologically divergent, monotypic, Australasian Phylloglossum. The Huperzia-Phylloglossum clade is strongly supported and is sister group to a Lycopodium-Lycopodiella clade. These results provide the first clear evidence for the relationships of the problematic Phylloglossum drummondii. Profound differences in life cycle and morphology between Phylloglossum and other Lycopodiaceae are interpreted in terms of paedomorphosis (specifically progenesis) and are viewed as adaptive responses to drought and brush fire. Our results show that rbcL sequence divergence among neotropical species of the supposedly ancient genus Huperzia is extremely low, and that additional data will be necessary to resolve relationships among epiphytes and ground-living species. These surprisingly low levels of sequence divergence indicate that most living species diversity within Lycopodiaceae is of relatively recent origin. Our results are consistent with a Late Cretaceous or Early Tertiary origin and diversification of epiphytic species within Huperzia, and these events may be linked to the diversification of angiosperms.
S1114	M. J. Donoghue;C. D. Bell;J. Li	2001	Phylogenetic patterns in Northern Hemisphere plant geography	International Journal of Plant Sciences	162	6S	S41-S52	10.1086/323278		biogeography; dispersal; vicariance; phylogeny; Northern Hemisphere; North America; Asia	Geological and climatological processes that have impacted the biota of the Northern Hemisphere during the Tertiary are expected to yield little resolution when area cladograms are compared without taking the timing of diversification into account. In an attempt to establish a set of appropriate phylogenetic comparisons, we distinguished between a Pacific track involving (minimally) China, Japan, and eastern North America but not Europe, and an Atlantic track involving China, Europe, and eastern North America but not Japan (or, in most cases, western North America). Within the two Atlantic‐track taxa considered here—Liquidambar and Cercis—European and North American species are more closely related to one another than they are to the Asian species. Within a set of five Pacific‐track taxa—Hamamelis, Weigela‐Diervilla, Triosteum, Buckleya, and Torreya—we see all possible relationships involving China, Japan, and eastern North America. Estimates of minimum divergence times between Old World and New World lineages, based on molecular and fossil evidence, differ markedly between the two Atlantic‐track clades. Among the Pacific‐track taxa, we find no correlation between pattern of area relationships and estimated divergence times of the Old World–New World disjuncts. Instead, we see a wide range in the timing of these splitting events among and within phylogenetic patterns. Despite the existence of a variety of patterns, inferred ancestral areas and divergence times can be explained by assuming initial diversification within Asia in a number of lineages, followed by iterative trans‐Beringian dispersion and vicariance.
S754	M. Lavin;M. F. Wojciechowski;A. Richman;J. Rotella;M. J. Sanderson;A. Beyra-Matos	2001	Identifying Tertiary radiations of Fabaceae in the Greater Antilles: alternatives to cladistic vicariance analysis	International Journal of Plant Sciences	162	S6	S53-S76	10.1086/323474		Fabaceae; island biogeography; cladistic vicariance analysis; molecular biogeography; penalized ; likelihood; coalescent theory	The fossil record shows that the legume family was abundant and taxonomically diverse in Early Tertiary tropical deciduous forests of North America. Today, woody members of this family are almost nonexistent in temperate deciduous forests. This former North American legume diversity now lies in the Tropics, including the Greater Antilles. To show the Antillean refugia, we detail a phylogenetic and biogeographic analysis of two legume groups, the Ormocarpum and Robinia clades, which have either a Tertiary fossil record in North America or a sister clade with such a fossil record. A combined analysis of molecular and nonmolecular data is used for the cladistic vicariance approaches, while an exhaustively sampled data set of nrDNA ITS/5.8S sequences is used for the molecular biogeographic analysis. Results from component, three‐area‐statements, and Brooks parsimony analysis are equivocal in suggesting an influence of Tertiary history on the distribution of the woody genera Pictetia (Ormocarpum clade) and Poitea (Robinia clade), two of the most speciose endemic legume radiations in the Greater Antilles. Alternatively, nucleotide diversity, evolutionary rates, and coalescent analyses of molecular phylogenies all suggest a Tertiary diversification of Pictetia and Poitea. The results are corroborated by a regression analysis that implicates both age of island biota and island area in accurately predicting numbers of endemic legume taxa. These findings, combined with the legume fossil record, suggest that both Pictetia and Poitea stem from Tertiary North American boreotropical groups. J. A. Wolfe’s hypothesis that the Greater Antilles harbor boreotropical relicts is supported.
S681	A. R. Mast;S. Kelso;A. J. Richards;D. J. Lang;D. M. S. Feller;E. Conti	2001	Phylogenetic relationships in Primula L. and related genera (Primulaceae) based on noncoding chloroplast DNA	International Journal of Plant Sciences	162	6	1381-1400	10.1086/323444		molecular systematics; chloroplast DNA introns; Primula; Primulaceae; heterostyly; leaf vernation; chromosome base number; pollen morphology; homology	We sequenced the trnL and rpl16 introns of the chloroplast DNA from 95 of the ca. 425 species (30 of 37 sections, seven of eight subgenera) of Primula L. in order to reconstruct the phylogenetic history of the group. Among the 24 additional taxa sampled are representatives of all genera that are likely to be embedded in Primula, as well as outgroups from the Maesaceae, Theophrastaceae, and Myrsinaceae. In the strict consensus of the most parsimonious trees, Primula and the genera embedded in it (Dionysia Fenzl., Sredinskya [Stein] Fedorov, Dodecatheon L., and Cortusa L.) are sister to a clade of several genera previously suspected to be embedded in Primula (Hottonia L., Omphalogramma [Franchet] Franch., and Soldanella L.). In recognition of this, two new rankless names are defined for these clades (/Primula and /Soldanella). Close relationships are inferred between Dionysia and Primula subgenus Sphondylia (Duby) Rupr., Sredinskya and Primula subgenus Primula, Dodecatheon and Primula subgenus Auriculastrum Schott, and Cortusa and Primula subgenus Auganthus (Link) Wendelbo. The largest subgenus, Aleuritia (Duby) Wendelbo, is dispersed among three clades that are not each other's closest relatives. Primula sections Muscarioides Balf. f., Soldanelloides Pax, Denticulata Watt, Armerina Lindley, and Aleuritia Duby are resolved as para‐ or polyphyletic with moderate to strong support. Throughout, we consider the striking morphological and cytological variation seen in Primula within a phylogenetic context, particularly as it relates to the close relationship implied here between Dionysia and Primula subgenus Sphondylia. The homology of involute leaf vernation in Primula is reconsidered in light of its two independent origins, and we come to the conclusion that vernation in subgenus Sphondylia is better characterized as conduplicate.
S658	M. E. Olson	2002	Intergeneric relationships within the Caricaceae-Moringaceae clade (Brassicales), and potential morphological synapomorphies of the clade and its families	International Journal of Plant Sciences	163	1	51–65	10.1086/324046		Brassicales; Caricaceae; Moringaceae; phylogeny; morphology	Recently published molecular phylogenetic studies indicate a sister taxon relationship between Caricaceae and Moringaceae; such a relationship was not identified in nearly 250 yr of morphological studies because the families share few obvious similarities. This study tests the monophyly of both families and attempts to identify morphological synapomorphies of the two‐family clade and of each family. Parsimony analysis of DNA sequence variation in the chloroplast gene rbcL supports the monophyly of both families. Sampling includes six original rbcL sequences and 20 from the GenBank database, with single representatives of each of the four genera of Caricaceae and four members of the monogeneric Moringaceae. To reconstruct intergeneric relationships, one nuclear (ITS) and one chloroplast (trnG) locus were sequenced from one to two members of each of the four genera of Caricaceae, with two species of Moringa used as an outgroup. In the tree resulting from the combined analysis of the ITS and trnG data sets, Cylicomorpha is the sister taxon to the rest of Caricaceae, which comprises Jarilla as the sister taxon to a Carica‐Jacaratia clade. To identify synapomorphies, morphological characters with state distributions congruent with the clades of interest are assessed for their similarity in structure, location, and function. Synapomorphies of the Caricaceae‐Moringaceae clade include subulate glands at the base and apex of the petiole and on the lamina and the pachycaul “bottle tree” life form. Synapomorphies of Caricaceae include articulated laticifers and the absence of libriform fibers. Synapomorphies of Moringaceae include pinnately compound leaves and monothecal, bisporangiate anthers.
S709	C. Rydin;M. Källersjö;E. M. Friis	2002	Seed plant relationships and the systematic position of Gnetales based on nuclear and chloroplast DNA: conflicting data, rooting problems, and the monophyly of conifers	International Journal of Plant Sciences	163	2	197–214	10.1086/338321		seed plants; phylogeny; Gnetales; rbcL; atpB; 18S rDNA; 26S rDNA; monophyletic conifers; character conflict; rooting problems; support	We investigated the systematic position of Gnetales and other seed plant groups using molecular data from 119 land plant species. More than 100 new sequences of rbcL, atpB, 26S, and 18S ribosomal DNA were analyzed together with available GenBank sequences. To evaluate thoroughly the phylogenetic information of each gene, the four data sets were analyzed both separately and combined using different character coding. We found no supported conflict between codon positions in the plastid sequences, but we found a more complex pattern, indicating conflict between transitions and transversions, within each position. Including all information, plastid data results in a “Gnetales basal” phylogeny, whereas nuclear data weakly supports anthophytes. When transitions are excluded, Gnetales associate with conifers. Our study does not answer all questions on seed plant phylogeny, but it does show conifers as monophyletic with high support, rejecting a close relationship between Gnetales and the conifer family Pinaceae. Nuclear and chloroplast data produced essentially identical phylogenies except for the position of the seed plant root, and a sister relationship between Gnetales and angiosperms could not be fully ruled out. These results strongly conflict with previously published analyses of mitochondrial data.
S876	D. L. Des Marais;A. R. Smith;D. M. Britton;K. M. Pryer	2003	Phylogenetic Relationships and Evolution of Extant Horsetails, Genus Equisetum, Based on Chloroplast DNA Sequence Data (rbcL and trnL-F)	International Journal of Plant Sciences							Equisetum is a small and morphologically distinct genus with a rich fossil record. Two subgenera have been recognized based principally on stomatal position and stem branching: subg. Equisetum (8 species; superficial stomates; stems branched) and subg. Hippochaete (7 species; sunken stomates; stems generally unbranched). Prior attempts at understanding Equisetum systematics, phylogeny, and character evolution have been hampered by the high degree of morphological plasticity in the genus, as well as frequent hybridization among members within each subgenus. We present the first explicit phylogenetic study of Equisetum, including all 15 species and two samples of one widespread hybrid, E. •ferrissii, based on a combined analysis of two chloroplast markers, rbcL and trnL-F. Our robustly supported phylogeny identifies two monophyletic clades corresponding to the two subgenera recognized by earlier workers. The phylogenetic placement of E. bogotense, however, is ambiguous. In maximum likelihood analyses, it allies with subg. Hippochaete as the most basal member, while maximum parsimony places it as sister to the rest of the genus. A consensus phylogeny from the two analyses is presented as a basal trichotomy (E. bogotense, subg. Hippochaete, subg. Equisetum) and morphological character evolution is discussed. We detected rate heterogeneity in the rbcL locus between the two subgenera that can be attributed to an increased rate of nucleotide substitution (transversions) in subg. Hippochaete. We calculated molecular-based age estimates using the penalized likelihood approach, which accounts for rate heterogeneity and does not assume a molecular clock. The Equisetum crown group appears to have diversified in the early Cenozoic, whereas the Equisetaceae total group is estimated to have a Paleozoic origin. These molecular-based age estimates are in remarkable agreement with current interpretations of the fossil record.
S1118	M. J. Donoghue;C. D. Bell;R. C. Winkworth	2003	The evolution of reproductive characters in Dipsacales	International Journal of Plant Sciences	164	5	S453-S464				Improved knowledge of Dipsacales phylogeny provides a solid framework for studies of character evolution. Although the polarity of many characters can now be confidently established, for others it remains unclear. This results largely from uncertainty about the broader relationships of Dipsacales, and is especially problematical for characters that differentiate the two basal lineages, Adoxaceae and Caprifoliaceae. Within Caprifoliaceae changes in stamen number became decoupled from corolla evolution, a reduction from five to four stamens coinciding with the origin of the Linnina clade. Subsequently, there was a reduction to two stamens within Morinaceae and to three, two, and one within Valerianaceae. In contrast, within Adoxaceae stamen number co-varies with the number of corolla lobes, although the number of stamens was effectively doubled within Adoxina by the division of each stamen. Fleshy fruits may have evolved separately in Adoxacaceae and in Caprifolieae. These vary in the number of seeds and in the presence or absence of an endocarp, and show repeated patterns in the evolution of color, perhaps underlain by shifts in the timing of developmental events. In Caprifoliaceae, dry fruits include bi-carpellate septicidal capsules in Diervilleae and initially tri-carpellate, single-seeded achenes in Linnina. Achene fruits exhibit a variety of independently evolved dispersal mechanisms, especially involving modifications of the calyx lobes or bracts subtending the ovary. Within Linnina a distinctive epicalyx surrounding the ovary appears to have originated through the fusion of supernumerary bracts. It is possible that the epicalyx evolved twice - once in the ancestor of the Morinaceae and again in Triplostegia- Dipsacaceae clade. Within the Dipsacaceae modifications of the epicalyx parallel those of the ovary and calyx within Valerianaceae, suggesting a transference of function involving homeoheterotopy. Evolutionary adjustments of the epicalyx, calyx, and ovary wall in relation to protection and dispersal may have established an evolutionarily stable configuration.
S868	T. Eriksson;M. S. Hibbs;A. D. Yoder;C. F. Delwiche;M. J. Donoghue	2003	The phylogeny of Rosoideae (Rosaceae) based on sequences of the internal transcribed spacers (ITS) of nuclear ribosomal DNA and the trnL/F region of Chloroplast DNA	International Journal of Plant Sciences	164	2					The phylogeny of Rosoideae was investigated using 44 species. Here we report new sequence data from the chloroplast trnLñtrnF region as well as an increased sample of species. The analysis of these new data, along with previously used data from the nuclear ribosomal internal transcribed spacers (ITS), significantly increased resolution as well as confidence for Rosoideae phylogeny. Analyses were conducted using both Bayesian inference and parsimony methods on the data sets separately and in combination. The resulting phylogenies are congruent with all well supported clades of Rosoideae found in previous analyses of ITS or rbcL data. The support for these and other clades is improved and we consider several clades supported well enough to be named. The following clades are given phylogenetic definitions: Sanguisorbeae and its subclades Agrimoniinae and Sanguisorbinae, Potentilleae and its subclades Fragariinae and Potentilla, Roperculina (Rosa + Sanguisorbeae + Potentilleae), and Sanpotina (Sanguisorbeae + Potentilleae). Potentilla includes the P. anserina clade (Argentina) in our trnL/F and combined analyses, but this relationship is not resolved by ITS alone. The previously used genera Duchesnea (P. indica), Horkelia, and Ivesia are strongly supported as nested within Potentilla. Comarum (P. palustris and P. salesowianum), Sibbaldiopsis (P. tridentata), Dasiphora (P. fruticosa), and Drymocallis (P. arguta) join Alchemilla, Aphanes, Sibbaldia, Chamaerhodos, and Fragaria in the well supported Fragariinae clade outside of Potentilla. The monophyly of both Potentilleae and Sanguisorbeae is well supported, and the clades correspond to previously named tribes with the exception of Alchemilla and its segregate Aphanes which are nested within Potentilleae instead of in Sanguisorbeae. The position of Rubus is still not securely resolved.
S937	H. Liu;J. Trusty;R. Oviedo;A. Anderberg;J. Francisco-Ortega	2003	Molecular phylogenetics of the Caribbean genera Rhodogeron and Sachsia (Asteraceae)	International Journal of Plant Sciences							Rhodogeron Griseb. and Sachsia Griseb. (Asteraceae) are two Caribbean genera. Rhodogeron is restricted to Cuba, whereas Sachsia is found in Cuba, the Bahamas, South Florida and Hispaniola. A phylogenetic study of nucleotide sequences of the chloroplast gene ndhF and of the internal transcribed spacers (ITS) of the nuclear ribosomal DNA shows that these two genera form a monophyletic group. The ndhF phylogeny places Rhodogeron and Sachsia within the tribe Plucheeae but with only very weak bootstrap support (59%). The ITS phylogeny indicates the serpentine areas of Cuba are the ancestral habitat for these genera, with a colonization route from Cuba toward the Bahamas and Florida. In addition, this study supports previous taxonomic treatments which considered S. divaricata Griseb. and S. polycephala Griseb. to be conspecific. Finally, Rhodogeron is the sister taxon to Sachsia, and we propose that it should be maintained as a distinct monospecific genus.
S803	J. R. Starr;S. A. Harris;D. A. Simpson	2003	Potential of the 5' and 3' ends of the intergenic spacer (IGS) of rDNA in the Cyperaceae: new sequences for lower-level phylogenies in sedges with an example from Uncinia Pers	International Journal of Plant Sciences	164	2	213–227	10.1086/346168		ETS; IGS; rDNA; phylogenetic utility; Cyperaceae; Juncaceae	In plants, the internal transcribed spacers (ITS; ca. 450 base pairs) of nuclear ribosomal DNA (rDNA) are the only well‐characterized nuclear sequences that are both easily amplified and appropriately variable for addressing relationships at lower taxonomic levels. In this study, we assess the utility of rDNA noncoding fragments from the external transcribed spacer 1 (ETS 1f) and from the 5′ end of the intergenic spacer (5' IGSf) for reconstructing lower‐level relationships in the Cyperaceae. Phylogenetic analyses using the genus Uncinia (tribe Cariceae) as a model indicate that phylogenies inferred from ETS 1f and 5' IGSf sequences are congruent with those derived from ITS. Although ITS and ETS 1f sequences evolve at similar rates, 5' IGSf sequences evolve ca. 1.3 times faster. The combined analysis of all three regions (ca. 1414 bp) produced 3.6 times more informative characters than ITS and greater than 40 times more than trnT‐L and trnL‐F spacer data. Trees derived from combined analyses were the most robust and resolved. Infraspecific variation in the ETS 1f (0.0%–0.17%) and 5' IGSf (0.0%) was extremely low, indicating that variation within species will not be a problem for phylogenetic analysis. Amplification experiments indicate that ETS 1f primers are universal for the Cyperaceae (ca. 5000 spp.) and Juncaceae (ca. 300 spp.), while 5' IGSf primers are limited to tribe Cariceae (ca. 2300 spp.). Phylogenetic analyses suggest that sections Uncinia and Platyandrae are monophyletic but that series circumscriptions are largely artificial. A significant topological difference with key taxonomic and biogeographical implications between ITS and combined analyses stresses the importance of using all three noncoding regions to infer lower‐level phylogenies.
S794	B. A. Whitlock;K. G. Karol;W. S. Alverson	2003	Chloroplast DNA sequences confirm the placement of the enigmatic Oceanopapaver within Corchorus (Grewioideae: Malvaceae s.l., formerly Tiliaceae)	International Journal of Plant Sciences	164	1	35–41	10.1086/344760		Oceanopapaver; Corchorus; Grewioideae; Malvaceae; Tiliaceae; Capparaceae; Brassicales; Capparales; Malvales	The monotypic genus Oceanopapaver is an endemic shrub found growing on serpentine soils in New Caledonia. Since the description of Oceanopapaver neocaledonicum by A. Guillaumin in 1932, five families have been suggested for it: Capparaceae, Cistaceae, Oceanopapaveraceae, Papaveraceae, and Tiliaceae. Phylogenetic analyses using DNA sequences of the chloroplast genes rbcL and ndhF strongly support the inclusion of Oceanopapaver in a clade of former Tiliaceae, Grewioideae (Malvaceae s.l.). Within Grewioideae, Oceanopapaver is nested within the pantropical genus Corchorus.
S939	L. B. Zhang;H. P. Comes;J. W. Kadereit	2003	The temporal course of Quaternary diversification in the European high mountain endemic Primula sect. Auricula (Primulaceae)	International Journal of Plant Sciences							Primula sect. Auricula is one of only few endemics of the European high mountains with a comparatively large number of species. We explored the section's geographical origin, time of origin, and temporal course of diversification via parsimony, genetic distance, and lineages-through-time analyses based on the internal transcribed spacer (ITS) regions of nuclear ribosomal DNA. The taxa analysed included 52 individuals representing all 25 species of the section, representatives of seven other European, Asian and/or North American sections of the genus, and two species of Douglasia. We present evidence that sect. Auricula likely originated from an Asian ancestor at the end of the Late Tertiary, followed by its primary diversification into an 'eastern' and 'western' lineage at the Plio-/Pleistocene boundary. Comparison with a constant-rates null model of stochastic diversification-extinction ('birth-death') demonstrates that diversification has proceeded non-randomly through Quaternary times in both lineages. They display a pulse of speciation events occurring soon after their origin, and relatively few such events occurring since. This pattern contrasts with the predictions of the ëLate Pleistocene origins' hypothesis and implies unpredictability of the evolutionary response of sect. Auricula to the recurrent abiotic conditions of the Quaternary glacial-interglacial cycles. We conclude that there is no necessity to invoke an increase in extinction rate. Rather, the observed slowdown of inter- (and intra-)specific diversification in sect. Auricula toward the present likely results from a decrease in diversification rate due to ecological and/or geographical space filling processes.
S1500	U. Manns;A. A. Anderberg	2005	Molecular phylogeny of Anagallis (Myrsinaceae) based on ITS, trnL-F and ndhF sequence data	International Journal of Plant Sciences	166		1019-1028				The phylogeny of Anagallis was elucidated by analysis of sequences from nuclear ribosomal ITS and two chloroplast regions, ndhF and trnL-F. The study included 20 species from the genus Anagallis; two species each of the three small genera Asterolinon, Pelletiera, and Trientalis; and 21 Lysimachia species. The result of a combined analysis using all sequences supports an Anagallis clade that also includes Asterolinon and Pelletiera as well as two Lysimachia species, Lysimachia nemorum and Lysimachia serpyllifolia, making Anagallis paraphyletic in its present circumscription. The clade was not found when analyzing separate data sets. The result contradicts earlier studies that indicate a distant relationship between Anagallis s.str. and Anagallis minima (Centunculus minimus) and a close relationship between L. nemorum, Lysimachia nummularia, and Lysimachia punctata. We also found strong support for a large monophyletic group of Lysimachia species, including the monotypic genus Glaux, and for a basal placement of Lysimachia ciliata and Lysimachia quadrifolia in the tribe.
S1230	J. B. Mols;D. L. V. Co;B. Gravendeel;L. W. Chatrou;M. D. Pirie;R. W. J. M. v d Ham;E. J. v Marle;P. J. A. Kessler	2005	Morphological character evolution in the miliusoid clade (Annonaceae)	International Journal of Plant Sciences							Annonaceae are a prominent plant family throughout tropical lowland rainforests, yet their intrafamiliar relationships and morphological evolution are still poorly understood. So far, inferred intergeneric relationships within Annonaceae have been based on morphological characters only. This study tested the phylogenetic significance of a large number of morphological characters with the help of a phylogeny reconstruction based on plastid DNA sequence markers (rbcL gene, trnL intron, trnL-trnF intergenic spacer, and matK gene) and morphology. The combined analyses included 76 predominantly Asian Annonaceae (the miliusoid clade) and four outgroup taxa. The resulting strict consensus tree was well resolved, but generally poorly supported for intergeneric relationships. Partitioned Bremer support analyses and character tracing showed that fruit and seed characters best reflect the relationships found. In general, however, morphological characters used in previous classifications turned out to be unsuitable for identifying intergeneric relationships. The miliusoid clade is differentiated from the outgroup taxa by several pollen characters (shape, ornamentation, and aperture type). Our results have profound implications for the understanding of morphological evolution in Annonaceae and imply that within the miliusoid clade axillary inflorescences evolved from terminal ones at least six times, stamen shape evolved from uvarioid to miliusoid, and spiniform endosperm rumination preceded lamelliform rumination.
S1791	A. L. Hipp;A. A. Reznicek;P. E. Rothrock;J. A. Weber	2006	Phylogeny and Classification of Carex Section Ovales (Cyperaceae)	International Journal of Plant Sciences	167	5	1029-1048				Section Ovales is the most species-rich section of the sedge genus Carex in the New World. Phylogenetic analyses of molecular data recover a predominantly New World clade as sister to a solitary East Asian species, C. maackii. Nuclear ribosomal DNA are congruent in the placement of all taxa within the section, with a solitary exception: incongruence between ITS and ETS data in the placement of C. bonplandii and C. roraimensis suggests a hybrid origin for this lineage. Biogeography correlates strongly with phylogeny in the section, but there have been at least two instances of long-range dispersal, one from an eastern North American clade to western North America and one from the New World to Eurasia. Morphological characters studied are all homoplastic. Developing a comprehensive infrasectional classification with a phylogenetic basis would be complicated by the fact that most of the novel morphological characters in the section have evolved within relatively small, independent clades.
S1431	P. Moline;M. Thiv;G. K. Ameka;J. P. Ghogue;E. Pfeifer;R. Rutishauser	2006	Phylogeny and character evolution in the African clade of Podostemaceae	International Journal of Plant Sciences							The African taxa of Podostemaceae are relatively poorly known. New matK sequence data for eight African Podostemaceae species of the genera <i>Dicraeanthus</i>, <i>Djinga</i> and <i>Ledermanniella</i> are combined with sequences representing all major groups in the family to test the placement of the African taxa in the family. All podostemoids studied from continental Africa form a clade that is sister to the Madagascan genera <i>Endocaulos</i> and <i>Thelethylax</i>. The sister of this African-Madagascan lineage is the American genus <i>Podostemum</i> and all Asian podostemoids. Important morphological transformations involving the African clade include the following: (1) A shift from erect to inverted flowers in the spathella is synapomorphic for the African podostemoids, although there is a reversal in <i>Djinga</i>. (2) Unilocular ovaries arising via septum loss may be synapomorphic for the African clade. (3) Crustose (i.e. foliose, disk-like) roots or very broad ribbons covering the rocky substrate like a carpet are derived characters of an African subclade consisting of <i>Dicraeanthus</i>, <i>Djinga</i> and certain members of <i>Ledermanniella</i>. (4) In several species such as <i>Dicraeanthus africanus</i> and <i>Ledermanniella letouzeyi</i> flowers arise endogenously along the stems and in <i>L. letouzeyi</i> even along the leaves, a character that has never been observed in any of the Asian or South American taxa.
S1737	H. Akhani;G. Edwards;E. H. Roalson	2007	Diversification of the Old World Salsoleae s.l. (Chenopodiaceae): molecular phylogenetic analysis of nuclear and chloroplast datasets and a revised classification	International Journal of Plant Sciences	168	6	931-956				A first comprehensive phylogenetic analysis of tribe Salsoleae s.l. (Salsoloideae: Chenopodiaceae) is presented based on maximum parsimony and maximum likelihood analysis of nuclear ribosomal ITS and chloroplast psbB-psbH DNA sequences. Our data strongly support 1) the sister relationship of Camphorosmeae to the Salsoleae s.l., 2) splitting of Salsololeae s.l. into two monophyletic tribes, Salsoleae s.s. and Caroxyloneae tribus nova, 3) the current status of most monotypic or oligotypic genera in Salsoleae, 4) polyphyly of the Botschantzev and Freitag‚s (among others) circumscriptions of Salsola, which falls into ten (on average) monophyletic genera/lineages. Three well-supported genera are described as new, including Pyankovia, Kaviria, and Turania, and four previously described genera are resurrected, including Caroxylon, Climacoptera, Kali, and Xylosalsola. Salsola s.s. include a group of central and southwest Asian and north African species which assemble Salsola section Salsola s.s., S. section Caroxylon subsection Coccosalsola, Salsola section Obpyrifolia, Fadenia, Hypocylix, Seidlitzia, and Darniella. All species of tribe Caroxyloneae investigated so far have C4 photosynthesis of the NAD-malic enzyme subtype while the majority of the species of Salsoleae s.s. are known to be NADP-malic enzyme subtype.
S1973	D. S. Gernandt;S. Magallon;G. G. Lopez;O. Z. Flores;A. Willyard;A. Liston	2008	Use of simultaneous analyses to guide fossil-based calibrations of Pinaceae phylogeny	International Journal of Plant Sciences							Uncertainties in the age and phylogenetic position of Pinaceae fossils present significant obstacles to our understanding of the timing of diversification in the family. We demonstrate that simultaneous phylogenetic analyses of chloroplast DNA (matK and rbcL) and non-molecular characters that include both extant genera and a limited number of fossil taxa provide useful hypotheses for calibrating molecular trees. Root placements varied for Pinaceae, with Bayesian analyses recovering mutually monophyletic subfamilies Pinoideae and Abietoideae, and parsimony analyses recovering Abietoideae as paraphyletic by placing the root between Cedrus and the remaining genera. The inferred phylogenetic position of fossil taxa Pityostrobus bernissartensis as the sister group to Pinus, and Pseudolarix erensis as the sister group to extant Pseudolarix was used to guide divergence time calibrations. These calibrations yield an Early Cretaceous or Early Jurassic age of crown group Pinaceae, respectively. The older age estimates based on Pseudolarix erensis are supported by weaker evidence from the fossil record, but are consistent with recent reports of Early Cretaceous leaf fossils that appear to coincide with extant genera. There remains a great need to characterize the anatomy of extant and fossil species, and to code additional non-molecular characters.
S2091	K. Marlowe;L. Hufford	2008	Geographic radiations and speciation in Southern Rocky Mountain Synthyris (Plantaginaceae)	International Journal of Plant Sciences							Topographical and ecological complexities in mountainous landscapes create evolutionary opportunities that are influenced by climate changes. Such changes can alternatively induce range expansion or contraction, impacting population demography and gene flow. We used phylogeography to infer evolutionary changes and range shifts for a clade of four Southern Rocky Mountain endemic Synthyris (Plantaginaceae) species: S. alpina, S. plantaginea, S. oblongifolia, and S. ritteriana. Plastid DNA trnT-trnL and psbA-trnH intergenic spacer sequences for 334 individuals from 29 populations had 34 haplotypes. The absence of shared haplotypes between S. alpina and S. plantaginea is consistent with a relatively deep divergence between these species, for which restricted gene flow with isolation by distance and allopatric fragmentation are inferred as isolating mechanisms, possibly associated with elevational differentiation. Synthyris alpina populations are currently in alpine interglacial refugia, but we find evidence of past south/southwest range expansion with isolation by distance. Synthyris plantaginea, which has its greatest haplotypic diversity in the Colorado Front Range, underwent southwestward range expansion. Synthyris oblongifolia likely evolved as a southern peripheral isolate, following expansion and then contraction of S. plantaginea. We recovered S. alpina and S. plantaginea haplotypes in S. ritteriana populations, a signature consistent with an allotetraploid origin of S. ritteriana.
S2357	E. A. Kellogg;S. S. Aliscioni;O. Morrone;J. Pensiero;F. Zuloaga	2009	A phylogeny of Setaria (Poaceae, Panicoideae, Paniceae) and related genera based on the chloroplast gene ndhF	International Journal of Plant Sciences	170	1	117-131	10.1086/428701			The genus Setaria is the largest genus in the so-called bristle clade , a monophyletic group of panicoid grasses distinguished by the presence of sterile branches, or bristles, in their inflorescences. The clade includes both foxtail millet and pearl millet, the latter an important cereal crop in dry parts of the world. Other members of the clade are weeds that are widespread agricultural pests. Previous molecular phylogenetic studies suggested that Setaria might not be monophyletic, but did not have a large enough sample of species to test this rigorously. In addition, taxonomic studies have suggested a close relationship between Setaria and Paspalidium, with some authors combining them into a single genus, but molecular studies included too few Paspalidium accessions for a meaningful conclusion. Accordingly, we have produced 77 new sequences of the chloroplast gene ndhF for 52 species not in previous analyses. These were added to available sequences for 35 species in 10 genera of the bristle clade, as well as four outgroup taxa. We find that Setaria species fall into several moderately to strongly supported clades that correlate with geography, but not with the existing subgeneric classification. Relationships among these clades, and among other genera within the bristle clade are unclear. Constraint experiments using the Approximately Unbiased (AU) test reject the monophyly of Pennisetum, Setaria, and Setaria plus Paspalidium, as well as several other groupings, although the test may be overly sensitive and prone to Type I error. The more conservative Shimodaira-Hasegawa (S-H) test fails to reject monophyly of any of the tested clades.
S604	A. Tartar;D. G. Boucias;B. J. Adams;J. J. Becnel	2002	Phylogenetic analysis identifies the invertebrate pathogen Helicosporidium sp. as a green alga (Chlorophyta)	International Journal of Systematic and Evolutionary Microbiology	52	1	273-279		http://ijs.sgmjournals.org/cgi/content/abstract/52/1/273	Helicosporidium; phylogeny; invertebrate pathogen; entomopathogen; green algae	Historically, the invertebrate pathogens of the genus Helicosporidium were considered to be either protozoa or fungi, but the taxonomic position of this group has not been considered since 1931. Recently, a Helicosporidium sp., isolated from the blackfly Simulium jonesi Stone & Snoddy (Diptera: Simuliidae), has been amplified in the heterologous host Helicoverpa zea. Genomic DNA has been extracted from gradient-purified cysts. The 18S, 28S and 5.8S regions of the Helicosporidium rDNA, as well as partial sequences of the actin and beta-tubulin genes, were amplified by PCR and sequenced. Comparative analysis of these nucleotide sequences was performed using neighbour-joining and maximum-parsimony methods. All inferred phylogenetic trees placed Helicosporidium sp. among the green algae (Chlorophyta), and this association was supported by bootstrap and parsimony jackknife values. Phylogenetic analysis focused on the green algae depicted Helicosporidium sp. as a close relative of Prototheca wickerhamii and Prototheca zopfii (Chlorophyta, Trebouxiophyceae), two achlorophylous, pathogenic green algae. On the basis of this phylogenetic analysis, Helicosporidium sp. is clearly neither a protist nor a fungus, but appears to be the first described algal invertebrate pathogen. These conclusions lead us to propose the transfer of the genus Helicosporidium to Chlorophyta, Trebouxiophyceae.
S819	A. Tartar;D. G. Boucias;J. J. Becnel;B. J. Adams	2003	Comparison of plastid 16S rDNA (rrn16) genes from Helicosporidium spp.: evidence supporting the reclassification of Helicosporidia as green algae (Chlorophyta)	International Journal of Systematic and Evolutionary Microbiology	53	6	1719-1723	10.1099/ijs.0.02559-0			The Helicosporidia are invertebrate pathogens that have recently been identified as non-photosynthetic green algae (Chlorophyta). In order to confirm the algal nature of the genus Helicosporidium, the presence of a retained chloroplast genome in Helicosporidia cells was investigated. Fragments homologous to plastid 16S rRNA (rrn16) genes were amplified successfully from cellular DNA extracted from two different Helicosporidium isolates. The fragment sequences are 1269 and 1266 bp long, are very AT-rich (60·7 %) and are similar to homologous genes sequenced from non-photosynthetic green algae. Maximum-parsimony, maximum-likelihood and neighbour-joining methods were used to infer phylogenetic trees from an rrn16 sequence alignment. All trees depicted the Helicosporidia as sister taxa to the non-photosynthetic, pathogenic alga Prototheca zopfii. Moreover, the trees identified Helicosporidium spp. as members of a clade that included the heterotrophic species Prototheca spp. and the mesotrophic species Chlorella protothecoides. The clade is always strongly supported by bootstrap values, suggesting that all these organisms share a most recent common ancestor. Phylogenetic analyses inferred from plastid 16S rRNA genes confirmed that the Helicosporidia are non-photosynthetic green algae, close relatives of the genus Prototheca (Chlorophyta, Trebouxiophyceae). Such phylogenetic affinities suggest that Helicosporidium spp. are likely to possess Prototheca-like organelles and organelle genomes.
S1634	J. A. Angelos;P. Q. Spinks;L. M. Ball;L. W. George	2007	Moraxella bovoculi sp. nov., isolated from calves with infectious bovine keratoconjunctivitis	International Journal of Systematic and Evolutionary Microbiology	57	4	789-795	10.1099/ijs.0.64333-0 			Infectious bovine keratoconjunctivitis (IBK; „pinkeye‰) is the most common ocular disease of cattle. The cause of IBK was previously established as Moraxella bovis, a Gram-negative rod {Henson, 1960 #330}. In northern California during the summer of 2002, eyes were cultured from calves affected with IBK in one beef herd and one dairy herd. While Moraxella bovis was isolated in some cases, the majority of isolated bacteria were hemolytic Gram-negative cocci. Eighteen such isolates had near full-length (1397 bp) 16S rDNA sequences that clustered into 3 different groups that had 99.9% identity and which were related to published rrs sequences of Moraxella bovis and Moraxella ovis. Results of sequence analysis of 6 housekeeping genes, the 16S-23S rDNA interspacer region, and partial 23S rDNA provide strong support for inclusion of these isolates within the classical Moraxellae as a novel taxon, for which the name Moraxella bovoculi sp. nov. is proposed (type strain: 237T ; =ATCC BAA-1259T = CCUG 52049T).
S849	P. S. Ward;S. G. Brady	2003	Phylogeny and biogeography of the ant subfamily Myrmeciinae (Hymenoptera: Formicidae)	Invertebrate Systematics	17	3	361-389	10.1071/is02046			We investigated phylogenetic relationships among the ìprimitiveî Australian ant genera Myrmecia and Nothomyrmecia (stat. rev.) and the Baltic amber fossil genus Prionomyrmex, using a combination of morphological and molecular data. Outgroups for the analysis included representatives from a variety of potential sister groups, including five extant subfamilies of ants and one extinct group (Sphecomyrminae). Parsimony analysis of the morphological data provides strong support (~95% bootstrap proportions) for the monophyly of (1) genus Myrmecia, (2) genus Prionomyrmex, and (3) a clade containing those two genera plus Nothomyrmecia. A group comprising Nothomyrmecia and Prionomyrmex is also upheld (85% bootstrap support). Molecular sequence data (~2200 bp from the 18S and 28S rRNA genes) corroborate these findings for extant taxa, with Myrmecia and Nothomyrmecia appearing as sister groups with ~100% bootstrap support under parsimony, neighbor joining and maximum likelihood analyses. Neither the molecular nor the morphological data sets allow us to identify unambiguously the sister group of (Myrmecia + (Nothomyrmecia + Prionomyrmex)). Rather, Myrmecia and relatives are part of an unresolved polytomy that encompasses most of the ant subfamilies. Taken as a whole our results support the contention that many of the major lineages of antsóincluding a clade that later came to contain Myrmecia, Nothomyrmecia and Prionomyrmexóarose at approximately the same time during a bout of diversification in the middle or late Cretaceous. Based on Bayesian dating analysis the estimated age of the most recent common ancestor of Myrmecia and Nothomyrmecia is 74 Ma (95% confidence limits: 53-101 Ma), a result consistent with the origin of the myrmeciine stem lineage in the Cretaceous. The ant subfamily Myrmeciinae is redefined to contain two tribes, Myrmeciini (genus Myrmecia) and Prionomyrmecini (Nothomyrmecia and Prionomyrmex). Phylogenetic analysis of the enigmatic Argentine fossils Ameghinoia and Polanskiella demonstrates that they are also members of the Myrmeciinae, probably more closely related to Prionomyrmecini than to Myrmeciini. Thus, the myrmeciine ants appear to be a formerly widespread group, which retained many ancestral formicid characteristics, and which went extinct everywhere except in the Australian region.
S1031	J. C. Banks;A. M. Paterson	2004	A penguin-chewing louse (Insecta: Phthiraptera) phylogeny derived from morphology	Invertebrate Systematics	18	1	89-100	10.1071/is03022			Penguins are parasitised by 15 species of lice in the genera Austrogoniodes and Nesiotinus and present an opportunity to analyse phylogenetic relationships of two complete genera of chewing lice parasitising a monophyletic host group. Taxonomy of the penguin lice has been revised several times including the erection of the genus, Cesareus, to contain some of the penguin chewing louse species. Additionally, other groups of species within Austrogoniodes have been proposed. We constructed a phylogeny for all the chewing lice parasitising penguins from 46 parsimony informative morphological characters and found support for two groups within Austrogoniodes but little support for the Cesareus genus. Austrogoniodes metoecus, the only Austrogoniodes species parasitising a bird other than a penguin, was basal in the phylogeny which suggested that if A. metoecus did originate from a louse species parasitising penguins, the host switching event was unlikely to have been recent. A superficial comparison of louse and penguin phylogenies identified some potential instances of cospeciation. However, a full analysis of cophylogenetic relationships between penguins and their lice awaits the publication of a better resolved penguin phylogeny.
S1307	P. E. Marek;D. H. Kavanaugh	2005	The evolutionary relationships of North American Diplous Motschulsky (Coleoptera: Carabidae: Patrobini) inferred from morphological and molecular evidence	Invertebrate Systematics							Individuals of the ground beetle genus Diplous Motschulsky, 1850 occur in riparian areas predominately throughout boreal North America and Asia. In order to infer the species phylogeny of the North American Diplous, we examined 97 morphological characters (56 quantitative characters and 41 qualitative characters) and 458 bp of the mitochondrial cytochrome oxidase subunit I region. We used the four North American species, four Palearctic species, and one undescribed species of a closely related genus to test the monophyly and the direction of character state change in North American Diplous. Overall, we found that North American Diplous appear to represent a monophyletic group, but that the morphological and molecular evidence did not support the same relationships in the placement of one of the species. We found that the total evidence trees agreed most with biogeography and considerations of accelerated morphological evolution. In this paper, we present a morphological phylogenetic tree, a molecular phylogenetic tree, a total evidence phylogenetic tree, a species key, species diagnoses, and a distribution map of Nearctic Diplous.
S1903	F. A. Kavanagh;G. D. F. Wilson	2007	Revision of the genus Haplomesus (Isopoda : Asellota : Ischnomesidae) with erection of four new genera	Invertebrate Systematics	21	5	487-535	10.1071/IS06031			This paper presents a revision of Haplomesus Richardson, 1908 (Ischnomesidae). Poor character definition, an ineffective diagnosis of the genus, and inadequate or poor descriptions and illustrations have resulted in difficulties in identification of species or generic membership. This study is based on type material or the literature, and encompasses 28 species. Four new genera are created, justified by a phylogenetic analysis of 26 ingroup taxa and a further 12 outgroup taxa. Four species of the ingroup were excluded owing to missing data. Four species are retained in Haplomesus sensu stricto; two species are removed to Cornuamesus, gen. nov; 10 species are removed to Fortimesus gen. nov. and 12 species are removed to Gracilimesus, gen. nov. One species, Haplomesus franklinae Merrin & Poore, 2003 is removed from the group and placed in Contrarimesus, gen. nov. with another species, Ischnomesus curtispinis Brandt, 1992. The species level is conferred on Haplomesus insignis orientalis. Haplomesus quadrispinosus sensu Brandt, (1992) is removed from H. quadrispinosus (Sars, 1879). and Haplomesus ?gorbunovi sensu Svavarsson, (1984) removed from Gracilimesus gorbunovi (Gurjanova).
S1998	A. Zaldivar-Riverón;S. A. Belokobylskij;V. León-Regagnon;R. Briceño;D. L. J. Quicke	2008	Molecular phylogeny and historical biogeography of the cosmopolitan parasitic wasp subfamily Doryctinae (Hymenoptera: Braconidae)	Invertebrate Systematics							The phylogenetic relationships among representatives of 64 genera of the cosmopolitan parasitic wasps of the subfamily Doryctinae were investigated based on nuclear 28S rDNA (~650bp of the D2-3 region) and COI mtDNA (603bp) sequence data. Monophyly of several widely distributed genera was also tested and the biogeography of the subfamily was inferred. The partitioned Bayesian analyses performed do not recover a monophyletic Doryctinae, though the relationships involved were weakly supported. Strong evidence was found for rejecting the monophylies of Dendrosoter, Doryctes, Ontsira, Rhaconotus, and Spathius. A dispersal-vicariance analysis showed a strong geographical signal for the taxa included, with molecular dating estimates for the origin of Doryctinae and its subsequent radiation occurring during the Eocene. The divergence time estimates suggest that diversification in the subfamily could have in part occurred due to the continental break-up events that took place in the southern hemisphere, though more recent dispersal events account for the current distribution of several widespread taxa. Several taxonomic inferences are made to the higher level classification of Doryctinae.
S577	M. K. Thayer	2000	Glypholoma larvae at last: phylogenetic implications for basal Staphylinidae? (Coleoptera: Staphylinidae: Glypholomatinae)	Invertebrate Taxonomy	14	6	741-754	10.1071/IT00019			Species of Glypholoma Jeannel, a genus previously moved to Staphylinidae from Silphidae, have adult synapomorphies of the Omaliine Group, a probably basal lineage of about 10 000 species. Adult characters have not definitively resolved the position of Glypholomatinae within the Omaliine Group, but suggest that it may be relatively basal. Larvae and pupae recently collected with adults of Glypholoma pustuliferum Jeannel are attributable to that species on the basis of that association, a good match of size and form between pupae and adults, known larval synapomorphies in Staphylinidae and background knowledge of the Chilean fauna; they are described and illustrated. Structural and chaetotaxic characters of these and larvae of 25 other Omaliine Group genera were subjected to phylogenetic analysis. The position of Glypholomatinae within the Omaliine Group remains uncertain, although it is weakly supported as forming a clade with Omaliinae and Microsilphinae. Monophyly of the subfamily Proteininae and its components and of the tribe Coryphiini of Omaliinae are more strongly supported.
S11x16x96c22c02c22	K. C. Huber;T. S. Haider;M. W. Muller;B. A. Huber;R. J. Schweyen;F. G. Barth	1993	DNA sequence data indicates the polyphyly of the family Ctenidae (Araneae). The	Journal of Arachnology	21		194-201				Mitochondrial DNA fragments comprising more than 400 bases of the 16S rDNA from nine spider species have been sequenced: Cupiennius salei, C getazi, C. coccineus and Phoneutria boliviensis (Ctenidae), Pisaura mirabilis, Dolomedes fimbriatus (Pisauridae), Pardosa agrestis (Lycosidae), Clubiona pallidula (Clubionidae) and Ryuthela nishihirai (syn. Heptathela nishihirai; Heptathelidae: Mesothelae). Sequence divergence ranges from 3-4% among Cupiennius species and up to 36% in pairwise comparisons of the more distantly related spider DNAs. Maximally parsimonious gene trees based on these sequences indicate that Phoneutria and Cupiennius are the most distantly related species of the examined Lycosoidea. The monophyly of the family Ctenidae is therefore doubted; and a revision of the family, which should include DNA-data, is needed.
S7x5x97c17c15c46	J. A. Miller;F. A. Coyle	1996	Cladistic analysis of the Atypoides plus Antrodiaetus lineage of mygalomorph spiders (Araneae, Antrodiaetidae)	Journal of Arachnology	24	3	201-213		http://www.jstor.org/stable/3705934		Cladistic analyses of the antrodiaetid spider genera Atypoides O.P-Cambridge 1883 and Antrodiaetus Ausserer 1871 yield a much more completely resolved phylogeny than that proposed by Coyle in 1971. Twenty-nine potentially informative characters were used in the analyses, which were performed using PAUP's a posteriori weighting options. Three independent analyses were performed, each with a ditferent outgroup. These outgroups were l) the antrodiaetid genus Aliatypus Smith 1908, the putative sister group of Atypoides plus Antrodiaetus 2) Aliatypus gulosus Coyle 1974, the most primitive Aliatypus species, and 3) a hypothetical ancestral taxon based on character states found in Aliatypus and the Atypidae, the latter being the putative sister group of the antrodiaetids. These three analyses produced a total of eight most parsimonious trees which support the following principal conclusions: l) Atypoides as defined by Coyle, is paraphyletic (Atypoides riversi 0. P.-Cambridge 1883 plus At. gertschi Coyle 1968 share with Antrodiaetus a common ancestor not shared with At. hadros Coyle 1968). 2) Antrodiaetus roretzi (L. Koch 1878) is a relict species which shares a unique common ancestor with all other Antrodiaetus species. 3) Coyle's unicolor group of nine Antrodiaetus species is paraphyletic; six of these form a recently-derived clade, (Antrodiaetus occultus Coyle 197l (An. yesoensis [Uyemura 1942], An. cerberus Coyle l971, (An. montanus [Chamberlin & Ivie 1933], (An. pugnax [Chamberlin 1917], An. hageni [Chamberlin 1917]), and the other three species, An. pacificu. (Simon 1884), An. robustus (Simon 1890), and An. unicolor (Hentz l841), are derived from more ancestral stock. 4) Coyle's lincolnianus group of three Antrodiaetus species, An. lincolnianus (Worley 1928), An. stygius Coyle 1971, and An. apachecus Coyle 1971, represents a valid clade. Our phylogeny suggests that two separate vicariance events led to the evolution of the two east Asian members of this otherwise North American assemblage. Vicariance events that are indicated by geological evidence and consistent with our phylogeny are postulated to account for the present distribution of North American species. New putative synapomorphies of Antrodiaetus and of Antrodiaetus plus Atypoides are proposed.
S488	W. H. Piel;K. J. Nutt	1997	Kaira is a likely sister group to Metepeira, and Zygiella is an araneid (araneae, araneidae): Evidence from mitochondrial DNA	Journal of Arachnology	25	3	262-268		http://www.jstor.org/stable/3705593		Various authors have offered three alternative hypotheses of phylogeny which suggest different sister groups to the orb-weaving spider genus Metepeira. In one case Kaira is sister genus to Metepeira, and Zygiella is sister to Kaira plus Metepeira; in another case, Kaira is sister genus to Metepeira, but Zygiella is a tetragnathid, and thus unrelated at this level of analysis; and in the last case, Zygiella is close to Metepeira, but this time Kaira is not closely related. To resolve among these conflicting hypotheses, six species of orb-weaving spiders were sequenced for mitochondrial DNA encoding a portion of the 12S ribosomal subunit. These data were analyzed with data from two tetragnathid orb-weavers to estimate the phylogenetic relationships among these spiders and to determine which genus is a likely sister group to Metepeira. Phylogenetic analysis using parsimony supports the hypothesis that Kaira is a likely sister group to Metepeira and that Zygiella is in the family Araneidae rather than the family Tetragnathidae.
S299	P. Sierwald	1997	Phylogenetic analysis of Pisaurine nursery web spiders, with revisions of Tetragonophthalma and Perenethis (Araneae, Lycosoidea, Pisauridae)	Journal of Arachnology	25	3	361-407		http://www.jstor.org/stable/3705602		Apomorphic characters of the Pisaurinae Simon 1898. here recognized as a monophyletic clade comprising 19 nominal pisaurid genera, are described. The genera Perenethis L. Koch 1878 and Tetragonophthalma Karsch 1878 are revised. Three Asian, two African and one Australian species of the genus Perenethis are recognized. The Asian species of the genus Perenethis comprise Ocyala dentifasciata O. Pickard-Cambridge 1885, Tetragonophthalma fascigera Bosenberg & Strand 1906, and Tetragonophthalma sindica Simon 1897. A lectotype is designated for the Australian species Perenethis venusta L. Koch 1878. Perenethis parkinsoni Dahl 1908 is regarded as a subjective junior synonym of P. venusta. The African species of Perenethis are Tetragonophthalma simoni Lessert 1916, and Tetragonophthalma symmetrica Lawrence 1927 with its subjective junior synonyms Perenethis huberti Blandin 1975, Perenethis lejeuni Blandin 1975 and Pisaurellus badicus Roewer 1961. A lectotype is here designated for the African species Perenethis simoni. Phalaea vulpina Simon 1898 is the only recognized species of the genus Tetragonophthalma with eight subjective junior synonyms: Tetragonophthalma balsaci Blandin 1976, Phalaea crassa Thorell 1899, Phalaea ferox Pocock 1899, T. guentheri Roewer 1955, T. Iecordieri Blandin 1976, T. pellengea Roewer 1955, Phalaea thomensis Simon 1909, and T. witted Roewer 1955. Cispius novus Caporiacco 1941 and Cispius tertali Caporiacco 1941 are both subjective junior synonyms of Cispius aethiopicus Caporiacco 1939, now placed in the genus Charminus (NEW COMBINATION). The genera Charminus Thorell 1899, Cispius Simon 1898, Tetragonophthalma, Afropisaura Blandin 1976, Perenethis, Maypacius Simon 1898, and Polyboea Thorell 1895 form a monophyletic group within the Pisaurinae, here called Perenethis genus group. The copulatory organs of this group are figured in detail, the vulval structures for the first time. Males and females of the poorly-known monotypic genus Polyboea are described, and their copulatory organs are figured for the first time. A cladistic analysis of the Perenethis genus group is presented. The Afro-Asian distribution of members of the clade Polyboea and Maypacius and the Perenethis-clade is hypothesized to be the result of independent range extensions during the expansion of suitable habitats between the Miocene and the beginning of the Pleistocene.
S410	V. T. Davies	1999	Carbinea, a new spider genus from North Queensland, Australia (Araneae, Amaurobioidea, Kababininae)	Journal of Arachnology	27	1	25-36		http://www.jstor.org/stable/3705962		The distribution of four species of Carbinea new genus in the Wet Tropics region of northern Queensland documents the species' richness and local endemism. The new species are C. longiscapa, C. breviscapa, C. wunderlichi and C. robertsi. They are placed in the sub-family Kababininae which is removed frorn the Amphinectidae (Davies 1995) as there is evidence that it does not belong there. The placement of this clade rernains problematical.
S411	C. E. Griswold;J. A. Coddington;N. E. Platnick;R. R. Forster	1999	Towards a phylogeny of entelegyne spiders (Araneae, Araneomorphae, Entelegynae)	Journal of Arachnology	27	1	53-63		http://www.jstor.org/stable/3705965		We propose a phylogeny for all entelegyne families with cribellate members based on a matrix of 137 characters scored for 43 exemplar taxa and analyzed under parsimony. The cladogram confirms the monophyly of Neocribellatae, Araneoclada, Entelegynae, and Orbiculariae. Lycosoidea, Amaurobiidae and some included subfamilies, Dictynoidea, and Amaurobioidea (sensu Forster & Wilton 1973) are polyphyletic. Phyxelidinae Lehtinen is raised to family level (Phyxelididae, NEW RANK). The family Zorocratidae Dahl 1913 is revalidated. A group including all entelegynes other than Eresoidea is weakly supported as the sister group of Orbiculariae.
S445	M. J. Ramírez	1999	New Species and Cladistic Reanalysis of the Spider Genus Monapia (Araneae, Anyphaenidae, Amaurobioidinae)	Journal of Arachnology	27	2	415-431		http://www.jstor.org/stable/3706039		The known range of the South American genus Monapia, previously known only from temperate South American forests, is expanded to central and eastern Argentina and Uruguay. A monophyletic group of five species with spinose forelegs is proposed, including M. angusta, newly transferred from Arachosia, plus four new species: M. charrua, M. guenoana, M. fierro and M. carolina. One new species, M. tandil (from Buenos Aires Province), is proposed to be the sister group of Monapia vittata. A data matrix with 43 characters for the 13 species of the genus (plus 9 amaurobioidine outgroups) was cladistically analyzed. Although relationships among species are mostly resolved, the basal phylogeny of the genus remains unclear. The previous hypothesis of relationships of Monapia alupuran is unsupported in this new analysis. Additional records are given for M. lutea and M. dilaticollis.
S2469	M. Hedin;S. Derkarabetian;M. McCormack;C. Richart;J. W. Shultz	2010	 The phylogenetic utility of the nuclear protein-coding gene EF-1a for resolving recent divergences in Opiliones, emphasizing intron evolution	Journal of Arachnology	38		9-20				Our focus was to design harvestmen-specific PCR primers to target both introns and exons of the nuclear protein-coding gene Elongation Factor -1 alpha (EF-1alpha). We tested this primer set on ten genera representing all primary lineages of Opiliones, with sets of close phylogenetic relatives (i.e., sets of several congeners) included to specifically assess utility at shallow phylogenetic levels. Our research also included the collection of parallel mitochondrial protein-coding DNA sequence datasets for the congeneric sets to compare relative rates of evolution and gene tree congruence for EF-1alpha versus mitochondrial data. The harvestmen primers resulted in successful amplification for nine of ten tested genera. Exon sequences for these nine genera appear orthologous to previously-reported EF-1alpha Opiliones sequences, which were generated using RT-PCR methods. Newly-generated exon sequences are interrupted by three separate spliceosomal introns; two introns are restricted to one or two genera, but a third intron is conserved in position across all surveyed genera. Phylogenetic analyses of EF-1alpha nucleotide data for congeneric sets result in gene trees that are generally congruent with mitochondrial gene trees, with EF-1alpha phylogenetic signal coming from both intron and exon sites, and resolving apparently recent divergences (e.g., as recent as one million years ago). Overall, the combination of gene orthology, conserved intron position, and gene tree congruence at shallow levels suggest that this gene region will prove generally useful for both phylogeographic and species-level phylogenetic analyses in Opiliones, complementing already-documented utility at higher taxonomic levels.
S579	D. S. Hibbett	2002	Shiitake mushrooms and molecular clocks: historical biogeography of Lentinula	Journal of Biogeography	28	2	231-241	10.1046/j.1365-2699.2001.00528.x		Beringia; biogeography; fungi; Lentinula; maximum likelihood; molecular clock; phylogeny	Aim Fungi make up a large, ecologically important group of eukaryotes that has been neglected in historical biogeography. In this study, molecular phylogenies and molecular clock dating were used to infer historical biogeography of the shiitake genus, Lentinula Earle, which occurs in both the Old World and New World. The major goals of this study were to determine if the Old World and New World groups are monophyletic, and whether the Old World/New World disjunction is the result of vicariance or long distance dispersal.;  ; Location Collections studied are from Asia, Australasia, the Gulf Coast region of North America, the Caribbean, Central America, and northern South America.;  ; Methods Phylogenetic trees were inferred with nuclear large subunit (nuc-Isu) ribosomal DNA (rDNA) and internal transcribed spacer (ITS) sequences. Molecular clock dating was performed using trees derived from nuc-Isu rDNA and mitochondrial small-subunit (mt-ssu) rDNA sequences. Rate constancy was tested with maximum likelihood, and clocks were calibrated using evidence from fossils or other molecular clock studies, or according to expected ages under different historical biogeographic scenarios.;  ; Results Analyses of ITS and nuc-Isu rDNA sequences suggest that there are seven species of Lentinula worldwide, which occur in two main clades, one in the New World the other in the Old World. Rate constancy cannot be rejected in nuc-Isu rDNA, but can be rejected in mt-ssu rDNA. Both genes suggest that the Old World/New World disjunction could be due to fragmentation of an ancient Laurasian range. An alternative Gondwanan hypothesis is not supported by the molecular clock age estimates.;  ; Main conclusions Only one long distance dispersal event must be invoked in Lentinula, that being between Australia and New Zealand. Despite having airborne spores, it appears that long distance dispersal is rare in Lentinula. This may also be true in other fungi, which are therefore excellent candidates for historical biogeographic studies using molecular characters.
S982	S. J. Wagstaff	2003	Evolution and biogeography of the austral genus Phyllocladus (Podocarpaceae)	Journal of Biogeography							Abstract Aim Examine evolutionary relationships within the genus Phyllocladus and among its close relatives by phylogenetic analysis of DNA sequences. Interpret the inferred relationships in association with the fossil record to examine the origin and diversification of the genus. Location Australasia. Methods Phylogenetic analyses of rbcL, matK and ITS sequences representing all of the extant species of Phyllocladus and a selection of outgroups from the Podocarpaceae and Araucariaceae. Results The rbcL and matK sequences exhibit little variation within Phyllocladus, but ally its members to Podocarpaceae although its immediate sister remains unclear. The ITS sequences resolve all five species of Phyllocladus and two intraspecific ecotypes of P. alpinus. Main conclusions Phyllocladus forms a distinct lineage that diverged early in the evolutionary history of the Podocarpaceae. The fossil record indicates that the genus was more widely distributed and morphologically diverse during the early Tertiary than at present. Although of Mesozoic origin, the level of sequence variation within Phyllocladus suggests that the extant species have undergone a relatively recent radiation. New Zealand is the present center of species diversity. Keywords Araucariaceae, Australasia, biogeography, DNA sequences, ITS, matK, New Zealand, Phyllocladus, phylogeny, Podocarpaceae, rbcL.
S1533	G. J. Measey;M. Vences;R. C. Drewes;Y. Chiari;M. Melo;B. Bourles	2006	Insights into amphibian colonisation of oceanic islands through the taxonomic status and phylogeny of Ptychadena newtoni	Journal of Biogeography							1. Aim Amphibians are a model group to study the biogeographical origins of salt intolerant taxa on oceanic islands, although there is often no clear evidence as to how colonisation events occurred. We used the Gulf of Guinea (GoG) islands to explore the biogeographic origins of island endemism of one frog and use this to gain insights into potential colonisation mechanisms. 2. Location São Tomé and Príncipe, two of the four major islands in the GoG, West Africa, are truly oceanic and harbour six endemic frogs and one endemic caecilian species. Although often ignored, the islands have an exceptional level of biodiversity, herein assessed by their vertebrate taxa. 3. Methods Mitochondrial DNA is used to test the endemic status of a frog from São Tomé and compare it with congeneric taxa from tropical Africa. Existing data on surface currents, surface salinity, atmospheric circulation and bird migration in the GoG are synthesised to address hypotheses concerning colonisation mechanisms. 4. Results The endemic status of Ptychadena newtoni (Bocage) is supported here by novel mitochondrial DNA sequences, and analysis of this and other molecular data indicates the possibility of an East African species close to P. mascareniensis (Duméril and Bibron) being its nearest relative. The possibility that this population was anthropogenically introduced is refuted in favour of natural dispersal by rafting. 5. Main conclusions With six endemic frogs and one caecilian the GoG islands harbour a diverse amphibian fauna, and five of these species appear to have their closest relatives in East Africa. Insufficient evidence exists for transportation by storms, birds or rafts alone. However, we propose a novel mechanism consisting of a raft, favourable surface currents and a reduction in salinity of the surface waters. Catastrophic events, or wet periods in the climatic history of the earth, could allow freshwater surface corridors to open far enough to enable continental flora and fauna to reach these and other isolated oceanic islands.
S1772	K. Spalik;S. R. Downie	2006	Intercontinental disjunctions in Cryptotaenia (Apiaceae, Oenantheae): an appraisal using molecular data	Journal of Biogeography							Aim The angiosperm genus Cryptotaenia (family Apiaceae, tribe Oenantheae) exhibits an anomalous distribution pattern, with five of its eight species being narrow endemics geographically isolated from their presumed relatives. We examined the monophyly of the genus and ascertained the phylogenetic placements of its constituent members in order to explain their distribution patterns. Location Eastern North America, eastern Asia, the Caucasus, southern Italy, Macaronesia, and Africa. Methods In total, 173 accessions were examined for nuclear rDNA ITS sequence variation, representing all major lineages of Apiaceae subfamily Apioideae and seven species of Cryptotaenia. Sampling of tribes Oenantheae, Scandiceae, and Pimpinelleae was comprehensive. Phylogenetic analyses included Bayesian, maximum parsimony, and neighbour-joining methods; biogeographic scenarios were inferred using dispersal-vicariance analysis (DIVA). Results Cryptotaenia is polyphyletic and includes three distant lineages: (1) Cryptotaenia sensu stricto (C. canadensis, C. japonica, C. flahaultii, and C. thomasii) is maintained within tribe Oenantheae; Cryptotaenia canadensis and C. japonica, representing an eastern North American-eastern Asian disjunction pattern, are confirmed to be sister species. (2) Cryptotaenia elegans, an endemic of the Canary Islands, is placed within Scandiceae subtribe Daucinae along with two woody endemics of Madeira, Monizia edulis and Melanoselinum decipiens. The phylogeny of these Canarian and Madeiran endemics is unresolved. They either constitute a monophyletic sister group to a clade comprising some Mediterranean and African species of Daucus and their relatives or they are paraphyletic to this clade. The herbaceous/woody genus Tornabenea from Cape Verde, once included in Melanoselinum, is not closely related to the other Macaronesian endemics but to Daucus carota. (3) The African members of Cryptotaenia (C. africana, C. calycina, and possibly C. polygama) comprise a clade with some African and Madagascan umbellifers; this entire clade is sister group to Eurasian Pimpinella. Main conclusions Elucidating the phylogeny of the biogeographically anomalous Cryptotaenia sensu lato enabled hypotheses on the biogeography of its constituent lineages. Cryptotaenia sensu stricto exhibits a holarctic distribution pattern with its members occurring in regions that were important glacial refugia. The genus probably originated in eastern Asia and from there dispersed to Europe and North America. For the Macaronesian endemic species˜Cryptotaenia elegans, Monizia edulis and Melanoselinum decipiens˜DIVA reconstructs either a single dispersal event to Macaronesia from the Mediterranean/African region or a single dispersal followed by a back-dispersal to the mainland. The radiation of Tornabenea from Cape Verde followed a second dispersal of Daucinae to Macaronesia. Woodiness in Melanoselinum/Monizia and Tornabenea, therefore, is a derived and independently acquired trait. The African members of Cryptotaenia are derived from an ancestor arriving from the Middle East.
S1873	R. L. Hunter;M. S. Webb;T. M. Iliffe;J. R. A. Bremer	2007	Phylogeny and historical biogeography of the cave-adapted shrimp genus Typhlatya (Atyidae) in the Caribbean Sea and western Atlantic	Journal of Biogeography							Aim: To infer phylogenetic relationships among five species of the cave-adapted shrimp genus Typhlatya in order to test competing hypotheses of dispersal and colonization of the disjunct cave localities occupied by these five species. Location: Typhlatya species are found in caves and anchialine ponds across the northern margin of the Caribbean Sea, along the Mediterranean and Adriatic coasts and on oceanic islands in the Atlantic and eastern Pacific oceans. This study focuses on five species, one from Bermuda, one from the Caicos Islands and three from the Yucatan Peninsula of Mexico. Methods: Partial sequences (c. 1400 base pairs) from the mitochondrial cytochrome b, 16S rDNA and COI genes were obtained from representative samples of the five species. Phylogenetic inference was carried out with maximum parsimony and maximum likelihood. Parsimony networks were constructed for the Bermudian species Typhlatya iliffei and one Yucatan species Typhlatya mitchelli, to determine the degree of connectivity among populations inhabiting different cave systems. Results: All three landmasses were recovered as monophyletic. The two insular marine species from Bermuda and the Caicos Islands formed a clade, while the three continental freshwater species from the Yucatan Peninsula formed another. Within both Bermuda and the Yucatan, shared haplotypes were found in different cave systems, suggesting recent or ongoing gene flow among populations in both locales. Main conclusions: The two insular marine Typhlatya species originated from an ancestral marine population, possibly already cave-adapted, that is suggested to have colonized the Caicos Islands and subsequently dispersed to Bermuda via the Gulf Stream. Divergence estimates suggest that colonization occurred before the formation of present-day anchialine cave habitat, which did not form on either island until the late Pliocene to early Pleistocene. Divergence estimates also indicate that the Yucatan freshwater species split before the formation of freshwater cave habitat in the Yucatan. These species could have inhabited crevicular marine habitats before the late Pliocene/early Pleistocene in the Yucatan or elsewhere in the Caribbean, and subsequently migrated to freshwater caves once they formed.
S1807	K. L. Ilves;E. B. Taylor	2007	Evolutionary and biogeographic patterns within the smelt genus Hypomesus (Pisces: Osmeridae) in the North Pacific Ocean	Journal of Biogeography							Aim We address questions about trans-Pacific distributions of marine organisms and the North Pacific Ocean as a centre of marine biodiversity through a phylogenetic and biogeographic study of a pan-Pacific genus of northern hemisphere smelts (Hypomesus, Pisces: Osmeridae). Location North Pacific Ocean Methods Relationships of the five species of Hypomesus, collected throughout the North Pacific, were reconstructed through maximum likelihood and Bayesian phylogenetic analyses of sequence data from two mitochondrial (cytb, 16S) and three nuclear (ITS2, S71, RAG1) gene regions of 5-25 individuals per species, totalling 3588 characters including indels. The resulting phylogenies were used to test hypotheses of species relationships and geographic origins using both dispersal-based and maximum likelihood methods for inferring ancestral areas (LAGRANGE). Cytb sequence divergence and a Bayesian approach (Beast) were used to estimate the timeframe of Hypomesus evolution, which was compared to work on similarly distributed taxa. Results Hypothesized trans-Pacific Ocean relationships based on lateral line scale-counts were not supported by the phylogeny, suggesting parallel evolution of this phenotype, although we found one such relationship between the western H. japonicus and the two eastern Pacific species (H. pretiosus and H. transpacificus). Dispersalist approaches allowed us to reject an early proposal of a double-compression vicariant mechanism as well as an eastern Pacific origin. Results from the LAGRANGE analysis suggested a more widespread ancestor, although also supported a role for the western Pacific. Divergence estimates suggested most splits between species occurred in the mid-Miocene, and the most recent speciation event, between the eastern Pacific species, occurred in the Pliocene to early Pleistocene. Main conclusions Our molecular data indicate that the character historically used to define relationships within Hypomesus, lateral line scale count, does not reflect ancestry within the genus. Biogeographic reconstructions suggest an important role for the western North Pacific in the diversification of Hypomesus. While uncertainty remains over the date of origin for this genus, estimates place the divergences during periods of climatic cooling that have been important in generating diversity in a number of similarly distributed organisms. Additional comparative data will provide further insight into the relative importance of the western region in generating diversity in the North Pacific Ocean.
S1557	Y. Jia;Y. Liu	2006	Timmia sphaerocarpa (Timmiaceae, Bryopsida), a new species from Xizang (Tibet), China	Journal of Bryology	28	4	350-356	10.1179/174328206x152289			Timmia sphaerocarpa, a new moss species from Xizang (Tibet), China, is described and illustrated based on the morphological distinction and molecular data. It is distinct from the other species of Timmia in the combination characters of gametophyte and sporophyte. The distribution of the new species is rather well defined to Tibet. A new section, sect. Sphaerocarpa is proposed. A key to sections of Timmia is also provided.
S396	K. Voigt;E. Cigelnik;K. O'Donnell	1999	Phylogeny and PCR identification of clinically important Zygomycetes based on nuclear rDNA sequence data	Journal of Clinical Microbiology	37	12	3957-3964		http://jcm.asm.org/cgi/content/abstract/37/12/3957		A molecular database for all clinically-important Zygomycetes was constructed from nucleotide sequences from the nuclear small subunit (18S) ribosomal DNA and domains D1/D2 of the nuclear large subunit (28S) ribosomal DNA. Parsimony analysis of the aligned 18S and 28S DNA sequences was used to investigate phylogenetic relationships among 42 isolates representing species of Zygomycetes reported to cause infections in humans and other animals together with commonly cultured contaminants with emphasis on members of the Mucorales. The molecular phylogeny provided strong support for the monophyly of the Mucorales, exclusive of Echinosporangium transversale and Mortierella spp. which are currently misclassified within the Mucorales. Micromucor ramannianus, traditionally classified within Mortierella, and Syncephalastrum racemosum represent the basal most divergences within the Mucorales. Based on the 18S gene tree topology Absidia corymbifera and Rhizomucor variabilis appear to be misplaced taxonomically. Absidia corymbifera is strongly supported as a sister group of the Rhizomucor miehei-R. pusillus clade while R. variabilis is nested within Mucor. The aligned 28S sequences were used to design 13 taxon-specific PCR primer pairs for those taxa most commonly implicated in infections. All of the primers specifically amplified DNA of the size predicted based on the DNA sequence data from the target taxa; however, they did not cross-react with phylogenetically related species. These primers have the potential to be used in a PCR assay for the rapid and accurate identification of the etiological agents of mucormycoses and entomophthoromycoses.
S2513	A. M. Fiore-Donno;A. Kamono;E. E. Chao;M. Fukui;T. Cavalier-Smith	2010	Invalidation of Hyperamoeba by transferring its species to other genera of Myxogastria	Journal of Eukaryotic Microbiology	57	2	189-196	10.1111/j.1550-7408.2009.00466.x			The genus Hyperamoeba Alexeieff, 1923 was established to accommodate an aerobic amoeba exhibiting three life stages amoeba, flagellate and cyst. As more species/strains were isolated, it became increasingly evident from SSU gene phylogenies and ultrastructure that Hyperamoeba is polyphyletic and its species occupy different positions within the class Myxogastria. To pinpoint Hyperamoeba strains within other myxogastrid genera we aligned numerous myxogastrid sequences: whole small subunit ribosomal (SSU or 18S rRNA) gene for 50 dark-spored (i.e. Stemonitida and Physarida) Myxogastria (including a new "Hyperamoeba"/Didymium sequence) and a ~400 bp SSU fragment for 147 isolates assigned to 10 genera of the order Physarida. Phylogenetic analyses show unambiguously that the type species Hyperamoeba flagellata is a Physarum (Physarum flagellatum comb. nov.) as it nests amongst other Physarum species as robust sister to Physarum didermoides. Our trees also allow the following allocations: five Hyperamoeba strains to the genus Stemonitis; Hyperamoeba dachnaya, Pseudodidymium cryptomastigophorum, and three other Hyperamoeba strains to the genus Didymium; and two further Hyperamoeba strains to the family Physaridae. We therefore abandon the polyphyletic and redundant genus Hyperamoeba. We discuss the implications for the ecology and evolution of Myxogastria, whose amoeboflagellates are more widespread than previous inventories supposed, being now found in freshwater and even marine environments.
S463	B. Hausdorf	1999	Molecular phylogeny of araneomorph spiders	Journal of Evolutionary Biology	12	5	980-985	10.1046/j.1420-9101.1999.00104.x		Araneae; genitalia; haemocyanin; orb web; phylogeny	The reconstruction of the phylogeny of spiders based on morphological and ethological characters is hampered by frequent homoplasies. Therefore, fragments of the 28S rRNA gene have been sequenced to elucidate some crucial points in the evolution of spiders. The following results were obtained. (1) The 28S rRNA gene data support the monophyly of the Entelegynae. Thus, the number of different subunits and the number of hexamers which form a haemocyanin complex must have been reduced at least twice within the spiders. The character state pattern within the spiders and within the Arachnida suggests that these reductions are due to a decrease in the selection on the oxygen binding properties of the haemocyanins as a result of the evolution of tracheae. (2) The semientelegyne spiders are not a transition stage between the Haplogynae and the Entelegynae. The lack of separate fertilization ducts in these species is probably due to secondary reduction. This reduction has decisive consequences for the flow of the sperm and for sperm competition. (3) Furthermore, the 28S rRNA gene data tentatively support the hypothesis that the orb web is either a plesiomorphy or has evolved at least twice.
S842	M. Haase;B. Misof;T. Wirth;H. Baminger;B. Baur	2003	Mitochondrial differentiation in a polymorphic land snail: Evidence for Pleistocene survival within the boundaries of permafrost	Journal of Evolutionary Biology	16		415-428				The genetic differentiation of populations having colonized formerly unsuitable habitats after the Pleistocene glaciations depends to a great extent on the speed of expansion. Slow dispersers maintain their refugial diversity while fast dispersal leads to a reduction of diversity in the newly colonized areas. During the Pleistocene almost the entire current range of the land snail Arianta arbustorum has repeatedly been covered with ice or been subjected to permafrost. Due to the low potential for dispersal of land snails, slow (re)colonization of the wide range from southern refugia can be excluded. Alternatively, fast, passive dispersal from southern refugia or survival in and expansion from multiple refugia within the area subjected to permafrost may account for the current distribution. To distinguish between these scenarios we reconstructed a phylogeography based on the sequences of a fragment of the cytochrome oxidase I from 133 individuals collected at 45 localities and analyzed the molecular variance. Seventy-five haplotypes were found which diverged on average at 7.52% of positions. This high degree of diversity suggests that A. arbustorum is an old species in which the population structure, isolation, and the hermaphroditic nature have reduced the probability of lineage extinction. The genetic structure was highly significant with the highest variance partition found among regions. Geographic distance and mitochondrial differentiation were not congruent. Lineages had overlapping ranges. The clear genetic differentiation and the patchy pattern of haplotype distribution suggest that colonization of formerly unsuitable habitats was mainly achieved from multiple populations from within the permafrost area.
S1281	F. B. Cruz;L. A. Fitzgerald;R. E. Espinoza;J. A. S. Ii	2005	The importance of phylogenetic scale in tests of Bergmann's and Rapoport's rules: lessons from a clade of South American lizards	Journal of Evolutionary Biology							We tested for the occurrence of Bergmann's rule, the pattern of increasing body size with latitude, and Rapoport's rule, the positive relationship between geographical range size and latitude, in 34 lineages of Liolaemus lizards that occupy arid regions of the Andean foothills. We tested the climatic-variability hypothesis (CVH) by examining the relationship between thermal tolerance breadth and distribution. Each of these analyses was performed varying the level of phylogenetic inclusiveness. Bergmann's rule and the CVH were supported, but Rapoport's rule was not. More variance in the data for Bergmann's rule and the CVH was explained using species belonging to the L. boulengeri series rather than all species, and inclusion of multiple outgroups tended to obscure these macroecological patterns. Evidence for Bergmannâ•˙s rule and the predicted patterns from the CVH remained after application of phylogenetic comparative methods, indicating a greater role of ecological processes rather than phylogeny in shaping the current species distributions of these lizards.
S1254	C. Lopez-Vaamonde;H. C. J. Godfray;S. A. West;C. Hansson;J. M. Cook	2005	The evolution of host use and unusual reproductive strategies in Achrysocharoides parasitoid wasps	Journal of Evolutionary Biology							We studied host selection and exploitation, two crucial aspects of parasite ecology, in Achrysocharoides parasitoid wasps, which show remarkable host specificity and unusual offspring sex allocation. We estimated a molecular phylogeny of 15 Achrysocharoides species and compared this with host (plant and insect) phylogenies. This tri-trophic phylogenetic comparison provides no evidence for cospeciation, but parasitoids do show phylogenetic conservation of the use of plant genera. Patterns of sequence divergence also suggest that the parasitoids radiated more recently (or evolved much faster) than their insect hosts. Three main categories of brood production occur in parasitoids: 1) solitary offspring, 2) mixed sex broods, and 3) separate (split) sex broods. Split sex broods are very rare and virtually restricted to Achrysocharoides, while the other types occur very widely. Our phylogeny suggests that split sex broods have evolved twice and provides evidence for a transition from solitary to mixed sex broods, via split sex broods, as predicted by theory.
S1423	C. Lopez-Vaamonde;N. Wikstrom;C. Labandeira;H. C. J. Godfray;S. J. Goodman;J. M. Cook	2006	Fossil-calibrated molecular phylogenies reveal that leaf-mining moths radiated several million years after their host plants	Journal of Evolutionary Biology	19		1314-1326				Coevolution has been hypothesized as the main driving force for the remarkable diversity of insect-plant associations. Dating of insect and plant phylogenies allows us to test coevolutionary hypotheses and distinguish between the contemporaneous radiation of interacting lineages versus insect „host tracking‰ of previously diversified plants. Here, we used nuclear DNA to reconstruct a molecular phylogeny for 100 species of Phyllonorycter leaf-mining moths and 36 outgroup taxa. Ages for nodes in the moth phylogeny were estimated using a combination of a penalized likelihood method and a Bayesian approach, which takes into account phylogenetic uncertainty. To convert the relative ages of the moths into dates, we used an absolute calibration point from the fossil record. The age estimates of (a selection of) moth clades were then compared with fossil-based age estimates of their host plants. Our results show that the principal radiation of Phyllonorycter leaf-mining moths occurred well after the main radiation of their host-plants and may represent the dominant associational mode in the fossil record.
S2367	A. Menkis;E. Bastiaans;D. J. Jacobson;H. Johannesson	2009	Phylogenetic and biological species diversity within the Neurospora tetrasperma complex	Journal of Evolutionary Biology	22	9	1923-1936	10.1111/j.1420-9101.2009.01801.x			The objective of this study was to explore the evolutionary history of the morphologically described filamentous ascomycete N. tetrasperma, and to reveal the genetic and reproductive relationships among its individuals and populations. We applied both phylogenetic and biological species recognition to a collection of strains representing the diversity of N. tetrasperma. First, we were able to confirm a monophyletic origin of N. tetrasperma. Furthermore, we found nine phylogenetic species within the morphospecies. When using the traditional broad biological species recognition all investigated strains of N. tetrasperma constituted a single biological species. In contrast, when using a quantitative measurement of the reproductive success, incorporating characters such as viability and fertility of offspring, we found that the phylogenetic and biological species limits overlap. Taken together, phylogenetically and biologically defined groups of individuals exist in N. tetrasperma, and these should be taken into account in future studies of its life history traits.
S2265	K. Uchida;S. Takamatsu;S. Matsuda;K. So;Y. Sato	2008	Morphological and molecular characterization of Oidium subgenus Reticuloidium (powdery mildew) newly occurred on cucumber in Japan	Journal of General Plant Pathology							In 2002, a powdery mildew with catenate conidia lacking fibrosin bodies was found on cucumber in a greenhouse in Kanagawa Prefecture, Japan. Morphological observation revealed that the fungus belongs to Oidium subgenus Reticuloidium, anamorph of the genus Golovinomyces. Molecular phylogenetic analyses of the nucleotide sequences of the rDNA ITS regions and D1/D2 domains of the 28S rDNA indicated that the fungus belongs to the clade of G. orontii with other Golovinomyces fungi from a wide range of host plants, suggesting that the fungus was newly transported from abroad. Because there has been no prior report of cucumber powdery mildew caused by Reticuloidium, further research on the physiology, epidemiology, control and resistant cucumber varieties is required.
S2005	R. L. Hunter;K. M. Halanych	2008	Evaluating connectivity in the brooding brittle star Astrotoma agassizii across the Drake Passage in the Southern Ocean	Journal of Heredity	99		137-148				Studies examining population structure and genetic diversity of benthic marine invertebrates in the Southern Ocean have emerged in recent years. However, many taxonomic groups remain largely unstudied, echinoderms being one conspicuous example. The brittle star Astrotoma agassizii is distributed widely throughout Antarctica and southern South America. This species is a brooding echinoderm and therefore may have limited dispersal capacity. In order to determine the effect of hypothesized isolating barriers in the Southern Ocean, such as depth, geographic distance and the Polar Front, two mtDNA markers were used to compare populations from the South American and Antarctic continental shelves. Astrotoma agassizii was shown to be genetically discontinuous across the Polar Front. In fact, populations previously assumed to be panmictic instead represent three separate lineages that lack morphological distinction. However, within lineages, genetic continuity was displayed across a large geographic range (> 500 km). Therefore, despite lacking a pelagic larval stage, A. agassizii can disperse across substantial geographic distance within continental shelf regions. These results indicate that geographic distance alone may not be a barrier to dispersal, but rather the combined effects of distance, depth and the Polar Front act to prevent gene flow between A. agassizii populations in the Southern Ocean.
S1991	A. Zaldivar-Riverón;A. N. M. d Oca;N. Manriquez-Morán;T. W. Reeder	2008	The phylogenetic affinities of the rare and enigmatic limb-reduced Anelytropsis (Reptilia: Squamata) as inferred with mitochondrial 16S rRNA sequence data	Journal of Herpetology							The phylogenetic placement of the limbless lizard genus Anelytropsis within Squamata was investigated using partial mitochondrial 16S rRNA sequences (422 bp). A total of 30 species, representing most of the major currently recognized squamate clades, was included in the analysis. As in previous morphological studies, Anelytropsis was strongly supported in Bayesian (mixture and unpartitioned models) and maximum-likelihood analyses as the sister taxon of Dibamus. Thus, a monophyletic Dibamidae composed of these two genera is supported by molecular data for the first time. Furthermore, several relationships in the inferred tree, although weakly supported, were congruent with those found in previous molecular phylogenetic analyses. Among these, Gekkota and the Dibamidae were recovered as relatively basal groups within Squamata. A non-monophyletic Scleroglossa and Lacertiformes (=Amphisbaenia + Lacertidae + Teiidae + Gymnophthalmidae) also were recovered. Although only weakly supported, a major difference from other recent molecular studies is the basal position of Serpentes.
S1119	T. A. Spradling;S. V. Brant;M. S. Hafner;C. J. Dickerson	2004	DNA data support a rapid radiation of pocket gopher genera (Rodentia: Geomyidae)	Journal of Mammalian Evolution	11		105-124				In this study, we address the question of phylogenetic relationships in the Geomyidae, focusing primarily on intergeneric relationships within the tribe Geomyini. Our study makes use of DNA sequences from two mitochondrial and two nuclear genes, and we use model-based methods of phylogenetic analysis to infer relationships and determine the level of support for each proposed relationship. Relationships among geomyine pocket gopher genera remain only partially resolved despite a number of earlier attempts to reconstruct their phylogenetic history and despite the newly generated sequence data analyzed in this study. This lack of resolution does not appear to result from insufficient or inappropriate DNA data, nor is it caused by inadequate sampling of taxa. Rather, molecular data and fossil data together lead to the conclusion that diversification within the Geomyini likely occurred during a geologically brief period in the Blancan. Rapid climate change during the Blancan, the origin of patchily distributed grasslands, and the evolution of hypsodonty may have triggered the rapid diversification that eventually produced the five extant genera of the Geomyini.
S1096	A. H. Castillo;M. N. Cortinas;E. P. Lessa	2005	Rapid Diversification of Subterranean South American Tuco-tucos (Genus Ctenomys; Rodentia, Ctenomyidae): Contrasting Mitochondrial and Nuclear Intron Sequences	Journal of Mammalogy	86	1	170-179	10.1644/1545-1542(2005)086<0170:rdosat>2.0.co;2			Subterranean tuco-tucos (genus Ctenomys) are a speciose group of South American hystricognath rodents, often taken as an example of explosive speciation. The fourth intron of the rhodopsin gene (567bp) and partial sequence of the second intron of the vimentin gene (403bp) were used to assess phylogenetic relationships among 20 species of Ctenomys and 3 octodontid species. The main groups of Ctenomys species previously reported in the literature (e.g. the ìboliviensisî and the ìmendocinusî groups) are confirmed, as is the lack of resolution of basal nodes. This star-like pattern of diversification of tuco-tucos relative to their sister taxon, the octodontids, was evaluated with the new nuclear dataset and an expanded mitochondrial dataset, providing further and independent evidence that Ctenomys underwent a phase of rapid diversification early in its history.
S2514	J. D. Hanson;J. L. Indorf;V. J. Swier;R. D. Bradley	2010	Molecular divergence in the Oryzomys palustris complex: evidence for multiple species	Journal of Mammaogy	91	2	336-347	10.1644/08-MAMM-A-342.1.Key			Nucleotide sequences from 94 individuals representing the Oryzomys palustris complex (O. palustris and O. couesi) were examined to assess phylogenetic relationships and taxonomic boundaries. Sequence data from the entire mitochondrial cytochrome-b (1,143 bp), a portion of exon 1 of the nuclear interphotoreceptor retinoid binding protein (1,266 bp), and intron 2 of the alcohol dehydrogenase 1 (580 bp) genes were analyzed using phylogenetic methods (maximum parsimony and Bayesian inference). In the cytochrome-b analysis, individuals recognized as O. palustris and O. couesi formed reciprocally monophyletic clades supporting their recognition as species; however, additional phylogenetically informative phylogroups were present within each of the 2 nominate clades. In addition, levels of genetic divergence within the currently recognized taxa exceeded values normally associated with intra-species variation. Together, the phylogenetic and genetic divergence data imply that consideration should be given to recognizing 4 additional species in this complex.
S2x3x96c13c21c25	P. G. Martin;J. M. Dowd	1991	A comparison of 18s ribosomal RNA and rubisco large subunit sequences for studying angiosperm phylogeny	Journal of Molecular Evolution	33		274-282				Partial sequences of 18s rRNA were obtained for 2 gymnosperms and 12 angiosperms from a wide range of families and these were analyzed with 5 other published sequences to form a phylogenetic tree. Using 16 published sequences of the large subunit of rubisco (rbcL), also from a wide range of angiosperm families, another phylogenetic tree was derived and the two approaches were compared. Both phylogenetic trees gave good grouping within families but in neither case was there resolution of the branching order of major taxa. Superficially the long rbcL sequences (whose base composition was homogeneous among all species) seemed very promising, but analysis showed that a large proportion of the variation did not affect the amino acid sequence. Although silent substitution contained some phylogenetic information, at the level required to order major taxa, much of it was random and obfuscating. It was concluded that neither macromolecule alone was likely to yield a solution to the problem of angiosperm phylogeny and therefore that studies of both, at least, will be required. For this reason, a method was described for obtaining both DNA and RNA of good quality from the same preparation and which had been used successfully with a wide range of species including many with pungent leaves.
S366	J. R. Garey;T. J. Near;M. R. Nonnemacher;S. A. Nadler	1996	Molecular Evidence for Acanthocephala as a Subtaxon of Rotifera	Journal of Molecular Evolution	43	3	287-292	10.1007/BF02338837		Rotifers; Acanthocephalans; Bdelloidea; Lemniscea 	Rotifers are free-living animals usually smaller than 1 mm that possess a characteristic wheel organ. Acanthocephalans (thorny-headed worms) are larger endoparasitic animals that use vertebrates and arthropods to complete their life cycle. The taxa Acantho-cephala and Rotifera are considered separate phyla, often within the taxon Aschelminthes. We have reexamined the relationship between Rotifera and Acanthocephala using 18S rRNA gene sequences. Our results conclusively show that Acanthocephala is the sister group of the rotifer class Bdelloidea. Rotifera was nonmonophy-letic in all molecular analyses, which supports the hypothesis that the Acanthocephala represent a taxon within the phylum Rotifera and not a separate phylum. These results agree with a previous cladistic study of morphological characters.
S373	K. M. Halanych;T. J. Robinson	1999	The utility of cytochrome b and 12S rDNA data for phylogeny reconstruction of leporid (Lagomorpha) genera	Journal of Molecular Evolution	48	3	369-379	10.1007/PL00006481		Leporidae; Rabbits; Cytochrome b; 12S rRNA; Lagomorph evolution; Saturation; Phylogenetics	Partial sequences of two mitochondrial genes, the 12S ribosomal gene (739 bp) and the cytochrome b gene (672 bp), were analyzed in hopes of reconstructing the evolutionary relationships of 11 leporid species, representative of seven genera. However, partial cytochrome b sequences were of little phylogenetic value in this study. A suite of pairwise comparisons between taxa revealed that at the intergeneric level, the cytochrome b gene is saturated at synonymous coding positions due to multiple substitution events. Furthermore, variation at the nonsynonymous positions is limited, rendering the cytochrome b gene of little phylogenetic value for assessing the relationships between leporid genera. If the cytochrome b data were analyzed without accounting for these two classes of nucleotides (i.e., synonymous and nonsynonymous sites), one may incorrectly conclude that signal exists in the cytochrome b data. The mitochondrial 12S rRNA gene, on the other hand, has not experienced excessive saturation at either stem or loop positions. Phylogenies reconstructed from the 12S rDNA data support hypotheses based on fossil evidence that the African rock rabbits (Pronolagus) are outside of the main leporid stock and that leporids experienced a rapid radiation. However, the molecular data suggest this radiation event occurred in the mid-Miocene several millions of years earlier that the Pleistocene dates suggested by paleontological evidence.
S653	G. Caetano-Anollés	2002	Evolved RNA secondary structure and the rooting of the universal tree of life	Journal of Molecular Evolution	54	3	333-345	10.1007/s00239-001-0048-3	http://www.springerlink.com/content/h9wq8ukvv7crgqgp/	Cladistic analysis; Molecular evolution; Ribosomal RNA; Secondary structure; Universal tree	The origin and diversification of RNA secondary structure were traced using cladistic methods. Structural components were coded as polarized and ordered multi-state characters, following a model of character state transformation outlined by considerations in statistical mechanics. Several classes of functional RNA were analyzed, including ribosomal RNA (rRNA). Considerable phylogenetic signal was present in their secondary structure. The intrinsically rooted phylogenies reconstructed from evolved RNA structure depicted those derived from nucleic acid sequence at all taxonomical levels, and grouped organisms in concordance with traditional classification, especially in the archaeal and eukaryal domains. Natural selection appears therefore to operate early in the information flow that originates in sequence and ends in an adapted phenotype. When examining the hierarchical classification of the living world, phylogenetic analysis of secondary structure of the small and large rRNA subunits reconstructed a universal tree of life that branched in three monophyletic groups corresponding to Eucarya, Archaea, and Bacteria, and was rooted in the eukaryotic branch. Ribosomal characters involved in the translational cycle could be easily traced and showed that transfer RNA (tRNA) binding domains in the large rRNA subunit evolved concurrently with the rest of the rRNA molecule. Results suggest it is equally parsimonious to consider that ancestral unicellular eukaryotes or prokaryotes gave rise to all extant life forms and provide a rare insight into the early evolution of nucleic acid and protein biosynthesis.
S904	F. E. Anderson;A. J. Cordoba;M. Thollesson	2004	Bilaterian phylogeny based on analyses of a region of the sodium-potassium ATPase alpha subunit gene	Journal of Molecular Evolution	58	3	252-268	10.1007/s00239-003-2548-9			Molecular investigations of deep-level relationships within and among the animal phyla have been hampered by a lack of slowly evolving genes that are amenable to study by molecular systematists. To provide new data for use in deep-level metazoan phylogenetic studies, primers were developed to amplify a 1.3-kilobase region of the alpha subunit of the nuclear-encoded sodium-potassium ATPase gene from nineteen bilaterians representing several phyla. Maximum parsimony, maximum likelihood and Bayesian analyses of these sequences (combined with ATPase sequences for twenty-three taxa downloaded from Genbank) yield largely congruent trees that corroborate recent findings based on analyses of other data sets (e.g., the 18S ribosomal RNA gene). The ATPase-based trees support monophyly for several clades (including Lophotrochozoa, a form of Ecdysozoa, Vertebrata, Mollusca, Bivalvia, Gastropoda, Arachnida, Hexapoda, Coleoptera, and Diptera) but do not support monophyly for Deuterostomia, Arthropoda or Nemertea. Parametric bootstrapping tests reject monophyly for Arthropoda and Nemertea, but are unable to reject deuterostome monophyly. The sodium-potassium ATPase alpha subunit gene appears to be useful for deep-level studies of metazoan phylogeny.
S1742	D. Erpenbeck;S. A. Nichols;O. Voigt;M. Dohrmann;J. N. A. Hooper;G. Wörheide	2007	Phylogenetic analyses under secondary structure-specific substitution models outperform traditional approaches - case studies with sponge LSU	Journal of Molecular Evolution							Many demosponge rDNA phylogenies result in trees, which are incongruent to either alternative gene tree reconstructions or morphological expectations. One reason for this outcome might be a suboptimal application of phylogenetic substitution models. While „standard‰ models describe the evolution of independently evolving characters fairly well, they are not suitable for sites coding for non-independent characters such as rRNA strands that form a helix in the ribosome. Such non-independent sites require the use of models, which take the co-evolution of the complete nucleotide pair (=doublet) into account. We analyzed 28SrDNA (LSU) demosponge phylogenies using such „doublet‰ models for pairing sites (rRNA-helices) and compared our findings with the results of „standard‰ approaches. We demonstrate that paired and unpaired sites of the same gene harbour different phylogenetic signals and that usage of doublet models results in significantly better demosponge trees. We show the influence of more sophisticated models on basal metazoan phylogeny and the phylogenetic relationships of demosponge orders.
S1938	I. Alvarez;A. Costa;G. N. Feliner	2008	Selecting single-copy nuclear genes for plant phylogenetics: A preliminary analysis for the Senecioneae (Asteraceae)	Journal of Molecular Evolution	66	3	276-291	10.1007/s00239-008-9083-7			Compared to organelle genomes, the nuclear genome comprises a vast reservoir of genes that potentially harbour phylogenetic signal. Despite the valuable data that sequencing projects of model systems offer, relatively few single-copy nuclear genes are being used in systematics. In part this is due to the challenges inherent in generating orthologous sequences, a problem that is ameliorated when the gene family in question has been characterized in related organisms. Here we illustrate the utility of diverse sequence databases within the Asteraceae as a framework for developing single-copy nuclear genes useful for inferring phylogenies in the tribe Senecioneae. We highlight the process of searching for informative genes by using data from Helianthus annuus, Lactuca sativa, Stevia rebaudiana, Zinnia elegans, and Gerbera cultivar. Emerging from this process were several candidate genes; two of these were used for a phylogenetic assessment of the Senecioneae, and were compared to other genes previously used in Asteraceae phylogenies. Based on the preliminary sampling used, one of the genes selected during the searching process was more useful than the two previously used in Asteraceae. The search strategy described is valid for any group of plants but its efficiency is dependent on the phylogenetic proximity of the study group to the species represented in sequence databases.
S440	M. G. Harasewych;S. L. Adamkewicz;J. A. Blake;D. Saudek;T. Spriggs;C. J. Bult	1997	Neogastropod phylogeny: A molecular perspective	Journal of Molluscan Studies	63	3	327-351	10.1093/mollus/63.3.327			The origin and evolution of the gastropod order Neogastropoda was investigated using an iterative, two gene (18S rDNA and cytochrome c oxidase I) approach to phylogeny reconstruction. Partial sequences spanning approximately 450 base pairs near the 5' end of the 18S rDNA gene confirmed the monophyly of Apogastropoda and its two subclades, the Caenogastropoda (including Neogastropoda and Architaenioglossa) and the Heterobranchia, but were incapable of resolving relationships among neogastropod families, or between Neogastropoda and higher Caenogastropoda. The monophyly of Heterobranchia is additionally supported by the presence within this group of a large insert of variable length in the 18S rDNA gene in the region corresponding to the E-10-1 helix of the RNA molecule. Cytochrome c oxidase I sequences were able to resolve fully the relationships among representatives of ten families of Neogastropoda. Maximum parsimony, maximum likelihood and neighbor-joining analyses of these data all revealed that Buccinoidea and Muricoidea (sensu Thiele, 1929) each represent a clade, while the families assigned by Thiele and some subsequent authors to the superfamily Volutoidea comprise a grade. Although the two toxoglossan taxa included in our study emerged as a grade rather than a clade, denser taxonomic sampling of this group will be undertaken to investigate further the paraphyly of Conoidea. Based on percent transversions at third codon positions of the CO I gene, differences among neogastropod families as well as those between the neogastropod families and Cerithium are comparable to genetic differences between orders of mammals, but are only slightly greater than differences between genera of penaeid shrimp.
S773	A. Valdés	2003	Preliminary molecular phylogeny of the radula-less dorids (Gastropoda: Opisthobranchia), based on 16s mtDNA sequence data	Journal of Molluscan Studies	69	1	75-80	10.1093/mollus/69.1.75			Maximum-parsimony analysis of the nucleotide sequence of the 16S mtDNA gene, obtained from several dorid nudibranch taxa, suggests that the radula-less dorids are likely to be a monophyletic group. However, there is little support for the most basal branches of the radula-less dorid clade. Most of the traditional groups within the radula-less dorids are monophyletic and for the most part well supported. These include the genera Dendrodoris, Doriopsilla, Reticulidia, Phyllidiella and Phyllidia (when Fryeria is included in Phyllidia). On the contrary, the family Dendrodorididae and the genus Phyllidiopsis are paraphyletic. Branch support for those arrangements that differ from the topology of previously published morphological trees is poor. Data obtained from the 16S mtDNA gene seem to be adequate to resolve the phylogenetic relationships of derived clades of radula-less dorids, but longer sequences are necessary to obtain more information at the most basal nodes.
S1187	D. R. Uit de Weerd;E. Gittenberger	2004	Re-evaluating Carinigera: molecular data overturn the current classification within the clausiliid subfamily Alopiinae (Gastropoda, Pulmonata)	Journal of Molluscan Studies	70		305-318				The current subdivision of the clausiliid subfamily Alopiinae relies for a large part on genital-anatomical characters. Based on a few such characters Carinigera is placed within the tribe Montenegrinini, whereas Isabellaria and Sericata are included within the tribe Medorini. This classification is unexpected on the basis of two observations: (1) Carinigera is conchologically indistinguishable from Sericata and highly similar to Isabellaria and (2) Carinigera, Isabellaria and Sericata have mosaic distributional patterns in central and northern Greece, which are difficult to explain given the low vagility of snails of these genera. The complete ITS1 and ITS2 and partial 18S rRNA, 5.8S rRNA and 28S rRNA sequences used in this study reveal that all Carinigera sensu auct. species are nested among Medorini, and should therefore be placed within that tribe. Apart from this, the results largely support the current higher classification of the Clausiliidae. Carinigera sensu auct. consists of at least two clades, which are not sister groups. Both are related to geographically close species hitherto classified with Sericata or Isabellaria. The two groups of Carinigera do not correspond to the alleged subgenera Angiticosta and Carinigera s.s. This study shows that, like conchological characters, the traditional diagnostic genital-anatomical characters used at tribe level suffer more often from homoplasy than previously thought. Therefore, classifications based on only a few such characters can be erroneous and should be mistrusted, especially when they conflict with both conchology conchological and distributional patterns, as in Carinigera.
S2211	D. R. Uit de Weerd	2008	Delimitation and phylogenetics of the highly diverse land snail family Urocoptidae (Gastropoda, Pulmonata) based on 28S rRNA sequence data: A reunion with Cerion	Journal of Molluscan Studies							The extreme morphological diversity in the land snail family Urocoptidae has complicated its delimitation from other land snail families, and has obscured its intra- and interfamilial phylogenetic relationships. Using an independent dataset of 28S rRNA DNA-sequence data, I tested morphology-based hypotheses about these relationships. These data refute the recent placement of the Australian genus Coelocion within the Urocoptidae. Instead, they provide strong support for a North-American/circum-Caribbean clade, to be named Urocoptoidea (new superfamily), which consists of the families Urocoptidae and Cerionidae. In all optimal trees (ML, MP and Bayesian), Cerion is nested among New World Urocoptidae, rather than occupying a basal position as their sister group. Even so, the monophyly of the New World Urocoptidae could not be statistically rejected. Judging from the fossil record, the superfamily Urocoptoidea originated in the south-western part of the North American continent, where it was widespread by the late Cretaceous. The Antillean Urocoptoidea most likely constitute three separate lineages that may have been carried eastward on the proto-Antillean island arc, which started in the late Cretaceous from a position near the SW North-American landmass. Shell characters used in urocoptid classification are re-evaluated in the light of these results, and consequences for taxonomy and implications for evolutionary research are discussed.
S2449	C. P. Kenaley	2010	Comparative innervation of cephalic photophores of the loosejaw dragonfishes (Teleostei: Stomiiformes: Stomiidae): evidence for parallel evolution of long-wave bioluminescence	Journal of Morphology	271	4	418-437	10.1002/jmor.10807			Four genera of the teleost family Stomiidae, the loosejaw dragonfishes, possess accessory cephalic photophores (AOs). Species of three genera, Aristostomias, Malacosteus, and Pachystomias, are capable of producing far-red, long-wave emissions (> 650 nm) from their AOs, a character unique among vertebrates. Aristostomias and Malacosteus posses a single far-red AO, while Pachystomias possesses anterior and posterior far-red AOs, each with smaller separate photophores positioned in their ventral margins. The purpose of this study was to establish the primary homology of the loosejaw AOs based on topological similarity of cranial nerve innervation, and subject these homology conjectures to tests of congruence under a phylogenetic hypothesis for the loosejaw dragonfishes. Based on whole-mount, triple-stained specimens, innervation of the loosejaw AOs is described. The AO of Aristostomias and the anterior AO of Pachystomias are innervated by the profundal ramus of the trigeminal (Tpr), while the far-red AO of Malacosteus and a small ventral AO of Pachystomias are innervated by the maxillary ramus of the trigeminal (Tmx). The largest far-red AO of Pachystomias, positioned directly below the orbit, and the short-wave AO of Photostomias are innervated by a branch of the mandibular ramus of the trigeminal nerve. Conjectures of primary homology drawn from these neuroanatomical similarities were subjected to tests of congruence on a phylogeny of the loosejaws inferred from a reanalysis of a previously published morphological dataset. Optimized for accelerated transformation, the AO innervated by the Tpr appears as a single transformation on the new topology, thereby establishing secondary homology. The AOs innervated by the Tmd found in Pachystomias and Photostomias appear as two transformations in a reconstruction on the new topology, a result that rejects secondary homology of this structure. The secondary homology of AOs innervated by the Tmx found in Malacosteus and Pachystomias is rejected on the same grounds. Two short-wave cephalic photophores present in all four genera, the suborbital (SO) and the postorbital (PO), positioned in the posteroventral margin of the orbit and directly posterior to the orbit, respectively, are innervated by separate divisions of the Tmd. The primary homologies of the loosejaw PO and SO across loosejaw taxa are proposed on the basis of similar innervation patterns. Because of dissimilar innervation of the loosejaw SO and SO of basal stomiiforms, primary homology of these photophores cannot be established. Because of similar function and position, the PO of all other stomiid taxa is likely homologous with the loosejaw PO. Nonhomology of loosejaw long-wave photophores is corroborated by previously published histological evidence. The totality of evidence suggests that the only known far-red bioluminescent system in vertebrates has evolved as many as three times in a closely related group of deep-sea fishes.
S1850	A. M. Corona;J. J. Morrone	2007	Phylogenetic analysis of the subgenus Lampetis (Spinthoptera) (Coleoptera: Buprestidae) of North and Central America, and the West Indies	Journal of Natural History	41		1035-1046				Phylogenetic relationships between species of Lampetis (Spinthoptera) of North and Central America and the West Indies were analysed by cladistic methods, based on 65 characters from the external morphology and male genitalia. Eleven species of different generic groups of the subtribe Dicercina were considered as outgroups, including also species of Lampetis (Lampetis) and one South American species of L. (Spinthoptera). The monophyly of Lampetis (Spinthoptera) is supported by two synapomorphies, but this subgenus appears to be more closely related to species of Psiloptera rather than to Old World species of Lampetis (Lampetis), suggesting that Lampetis (Spinthoptera) may be segregated from Lampetis as a different genus. The species of Lampetis (Spinthoptera) from North and Central America and the West Indies do not represent a monophyletic taxon, because L. (S.) tucumana (South American outgroup) is nested within them. Comparison of these results with a previous panbiogeographic analysis indicate that several generalised tracks possess species from different clades, thus suggesting an ancient radiation of this taxon in Mesoamerica and the Mexican Transition Zone.
S595	K. B. Nguyen;J. Maruniak;B. J. Adams	2001	Diagnostic and Phylogenetic Utility of the rDNA Internal Transcribed Spacer Sequences of Steinernema	Journal of Nematology	33	2-3	73-82		http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2638135/	Entomopathogenic nematodes; evolution; ITS region; molecular systematics; nematode; phylogeny; ribosomal DNA ; species delimitation; species diagnosis; systematics; taxonomy	The ITS regions of 10 species of Steinernema were PCR amplified and directly sequenced. Restriction mapping of these sequences revealed diagnostic variation such that the number of cuts and the length of the resulting fragments can be used to diagnose Steinernema species. Nevertheless, identical fragment sizes produced by non-homologous restriction sites also were identified. Pronounced variation in sequence length and nucleotide composition resulted in optimized alignments containing extensive regions of dubious homology. Significant shifts in nucleotide base composition exist among taxa and appear to mirror evolutionary history. These shifts do not have an observable influence on phylogenetic reconstruction and are probably due to descent as opposed to convergence. Alignment instability and the presence of alignment-ambiguous regions had the greatest effect on phylogeny reconstruction. Our results support the taxonomic utility of the ITS region to diagnose nematode species of the genus Steinernema, and all sampled taxa show evidence (in the form of numerous autapomorphic characters) of lineage independence. However, the ITS region appears to be phylogenetically informative only for closely related sister species. High variability among more distantly related taxa preclude its use for confidently resolving relationships among all members of the genus.
S720	A. Sabo;L. G. L. Reis;E. Krall;M. Mundo-Ocampo;V. R. Ferris	2002	Phylogenetic Relationships of a Distinct Species of Globodera from Portugal and Two Punctodera Species	Journal of Nematology	34	3	263–266		http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2620565/	5.8S gene; Globodera; ITS1; ITS2; nematode; phylogenetic analysis; Punctodera; Punctodera chalcoensis; Punctodera punctata; ribosomal DNA	Evolutionary relationships based on ribosomal DNA (rDNA) sequence data for a previously unknown species of Globodera from Portugal, Punctodera chalcoensis from Mexico, and P. punctata from Estonia, plus previously published sequences, support the following relationships: (((Cactodera weissi, G. artemisiae, C. milleri), ((G. sp. Bouro, G. sp. Canha, G. sp. Ladoeiro), ((G. pallida, G. rostochiensis), (P. chalcoensis, P. punctata)))), Heterodera avenae). Globodera sp. from Portugal, which can be confused with potato cyst nematodes by phytosanitary services when the identification is based only on morphological characters, is clearly different based on our molecular data. In addition, the rDNA data show the Globodera sp. to be only distantly related to other European Globodera species that parasitize Asteraceae. Punctodera chalcoensis and P. punctata form a sister clade to the G. pallida + G. rostochiensis clade.
S1655	C. M. G. Oliveira;L. C. C. B. Ferraz;R. Neilson	2006	Xiphinema krugi, species complex or complex of cryptic species?	Journal of Nematology							Fourteen morphologically putative populations of X. krugi were clearly separated into four different profiles by RFLP analysis (Alu I, Rsa I and Hinf I), sequencing of the ITS-1 region and subsequent Maximum Likelihood phylogenetic analyses. These four profiles were further supported by a principal component analysis of morphometric characters that yielded four taxonomic clusters which matched those produced by the molecular data. Sequence homology was: a) greater amongst populations that represented the same RFLP profile than between profiles, and b) similar both between representative populations of the RFLP profiles and putative closely related Xiphinema species. This study suggests that X. krugi is a potential species complex comprised of at least four distinct genotypes.
S1428	M. G. D. Robin;W. Ye;N. Kanzaki;D. Williams;K. Morris;W. K. Thomas	2006	Stomatal Ultrastructure, Molecular Phylogeny and Description of Parasitodiplogaster laevigata n. sp. (Nematoda: Diplogastridae), a Parasite of Fig Wasps from Ficus laevigata from Florida	Journal of Nematology							Parasitodiplogaster comprises a potentially large radiation of nematode species that appear to be parasitically bound to their Agaonid fig wasp hosts, which are mutualistically associated in the syconia (figs) of the diverse plant genus Ficus. Parasitodiplogaster laevigata n. sp., a parasitic associate of the fig wasp, Pegoscapus sp. from Ficus laevigata from southern Florida is described and illustrated. Parasitodiplogaster laevigata n. sp. is the first species of Parasitodiplogaster reported from North America and is closest to P. trigonema from F. trigonata from Panama based upon morphological similarities in males and molecular phylogenetic analysis of the D2D3 expansion segments of the large subunit (LSU) rRNA gene. Parasitodiplogaster laevigata n. sp. can be differentiated from all described species of Parasitodiplogaster based upon stomatal morphology (presence of a large dorsal and a right subventral tooth) in the adults of both sexes, molecular comparisons of D2D3, and fig/fig wasp host affinities. The ultrastructure of P. laevigata n. sp. was elucidated using TEM and SEM for comparisons with other species of Parasitodiplogaster and for generating hypotheses about the origin of this major radiation of parasitic nematodes in the Diplogastridae. The stoma of P. laevigata n. sp. possesses a non-segmented cheilostomal ring that connects to the longitudinal body musculature per- and interradially, a claw-like dorsal tooth, a right subventral tooth, and telostegostomatal apodemes arising from the dorsal side of each subventral sector suggesting affinities with Koerneria. However, the dorsal esophageal gland orifice does not exit the tip of the dorsal tooth as with Koerneria, but through a distinct telostegostomatal plate below the tooth. The unification of the pro-, meso-, and metastegostom with the gymnostom in P. laevigata n. sp. and further simplification in other described species may be due to derived adaptations associated with the internal parasitism of fig wasps.
S797	G. D. F. Wilson;G. D. Edgecombe	2003	The Triassic isopod Protamphisopus wianamattensis (Chilton) and comparison with extant taxa (Crustacea, phreatoicidea)	Journal of Paleontology	77	3	454-470				Protamphisopus wianamattensis (Chilton, 1918) from the Middle Triassic (Anisian) Ashfield Shale in the Sydney Basin, Australia, is the earliest-known freshwater representative of the basal isopod suborder Phreatoicidea. In contrast, the late Paleozoic Palaeophreatoicidae species, which are morphologically distinct from extant families, are found in marine or estuarine facies. Comparison of _Protamphisopus wianamattensis_ with extant Phreatoicidea permits the external morphology of the fossils to be reconstructed and the species to be coded for cladistic analysis using a character set developed for living phreatoicideans. In the parsimonious trees as well as immediately suboptimal trees, _Protamphisopus_ is nested within clades related to the extant family Amphisopodidae. Although not included in the analysis, the Late Permian fossil _Protamphisopus reichelti_ Malzahn (in Glaessner and Malzahn, 1962) appears to be a member of the Palaeophreatoicidae, rather than placed among the living families. Therefore, a minimum age of Middle Triassic can be assigned to the basal branchings within the crown group of the Phreatoicidea. The minimum age for the colonisation of fresh water by the the suborder is also established although, given the advanced position of _Protamphisopus wianamattensis_ in the cladograms, the habitat shift may have occurred earlier. The biogeographic distribution of extant Phreatoicidea on fragments of Gondwana is consistent with Early Mesozoic origins for the major clades of this isopod suborder.
S551	S. A. Nadler;E. P. Hoberg;D. S. S. Hudspeth;L. G. Rickard	2000	Relationships of Nematodirus species and Nematodirus battus isolates (Nematoda: Trichostrongyloidea) based on nuclear ribosomal DNA sequences	Journal of Parasitology	86	3	588-601	10.1645/0022-3395(2000)086[0588:RONSAN]2.0.CO;2			Nuclear ribosomal sequence data from the internal transcribed spacers (ITS-1 and ITS-2), 5.8S subunit, and regions of the 18S and 28S genes were used to investigate sequence diversity among geographic samples of Nematodirus battus, and to infer phylogenetic relationships among Nematodirus species. Phylogenetic analysis of these data yielded strong support for relationships among species, depicting Nematodirus helvetianus and Nematodirus spathiger as sister-taxa and a clade of these 2 species and Nematodirus filicollis. This tree is consistent with caprine bovids as ancestral hosts, with a subsequent host-shift to Bovinae in N. helvetianus. Eleven of 14 N. battus sequences were unique, with 19 variable sites among sequences representing 5 geographic samples. The lowest number of variable nucleotide sites was observed in samples representing apparently recent introductions to the United States and Canada, which is consistent with a population bottleneck concomitant with translocation. Comparison of directly sequenced PCR products and clones revealed evidence for intraindividual variation at some of the sequence sites, and this pattern of variation and that within geographic samples indicates incomplete rDNA repeat homogenization within species. This pattern of variation is not conducive for inferring phylogenetic relationships among sequences representing N. battus, or addressing the putative history of introduction.
S552	S. A. Nadler;D. S. S. Hudspeth	2000	Phylogeny of the Ascaridoidea (Nematoda: Ascaridida) based on three genes and morphology: Hypotheses of structural and sequence evolution	Journal of Parasitology	86	2	380-393	10.1645/0022-3395(2000)086[0380:POTANA]2.0.CO;2			Ascaridoid nematodes parasitize the gastrointestinal tract of vertebrate definitive hosts, and are represented by more than 50 described genera. We used 582 nucleotides (83% of the coding sequence) of the mitochondrial gene cytochrome oxidase subunit 2, in combination with published small- and large-subunit nuclear rDNA sequences (2,557 characters) and morphological data (20 characters), to produce a phylogenetic hypothesis for representatives of this superfamily. This combined evidence phylogeny strongly supported clades that, with 1 exception, were consistent with Fagerholm's 1991 classification. Parsimony mapping of character states on the combined evidence tree was used to develop hypotheses for the evolution of morphological, life history, and amino acid characters. This analysis of character evolution revealed that certain key features that have been used by previous workers for developing taxonomic and evolutionary hypotheses represent plesiomorphic states. Cytochrome oxidase subunit 2 nucleotides show a strong compositional bias to A+T, and a substitution bias to thymine. These biases are most apparent at third positions of codons and 4-fold degenerate sites, which is consistent with the nonrandom substitution pattern of A+T pressure. Despite nucleotide bias, cytochrome oxidase amino acid sequences show conservation and retention of critical functional residues, as inferred from comparisons to other organisms.
S555	S. P. Stock;J. F. Campbell;S. A. Nadler	2001	Phylogeny of Steinernema Travassos, 1927 (Cephalobina: Steinernematidae) inferred from ribosomal DNA sequences and morphological characters	Journal of Parasitology	87	4	877-889	10.1645/0022-3395(2001)087[0877:POSTCS]2.0.CO;2			Entomopathogenic nematodes in Steinernema, together with their symbiont bacteria Xenorhabdus, are obligate and lethal parasites of insects that can provide effective biological control of some important lepidopteran, dipteran, and coleopteran pests of commercial crops. Phylogenetic relationships among 21 Steinernema species were estimated using 28S ribosomal DNA (rDNA) sequences and morphological characters. Sequences of the rDNA internal transcribed spacers were obtained to provide additional molecular characters to resolve relationships among  Steinernema carpocapsae, Steinernema scapterisci, Steinernema siamkayai, and  Steinernema monticolum. Four equally parsimonious trees resulted from combined analysis of 28S sequences and 22 morphological characters. Clades inferred from analyses of molecular sequences and combined datasets were primarily reliably supported as assessed by bootstrap resampling, whereas those inferred from morphological data alone were not. Although partially consistent with some traditional expectations and previous phylogenetic studies, the hypotheses inferred from molecular evidence, and those from combined analysis of morphological and molecular data, provide a new and comprehensive framework for evaluating character evolution of steinernematids. Interpretation of morphological character evolution on 6 trees inferred from sequence data and combined evidence suggests that many structural features of these nematodes are highly homoplastic, and that some structures previously used to hypothesize relationships represent ancestral character states.
S884	V. León-Règagnon;D. R. Brooks	2003	Molecular phylogeny of Haematoloechus Looss, 1899 (Digenea: Plagiorchiidae), with emphasis on North American species	Journal of Parasitology	89	6	1206-1211				Phylogenetic hypothesis of 23 populations corresponding to 18 species of the digenean genus Haematoloechus from America, Europe and Africa, based on rDNA 28S partial sequences (~890 bp) is presented. Genetic divergence between the ingroup and the outgroups ranged from 9.7-14.5%, and within the ingroup from 0.9-12.2%. Eight most parsimonious trees 569 steps long were obtained, with a consistency index of 72%. Groups in the tree are not congruent with previous classification schemes of species in the genus, based on a small number of morphological characters. For this subset of Haematoleochus, plesiomorphic hosts are species of the genus Rana, with two colonizations to other amphibian groups. African species appear to have diverged following separation of Gondwana and Laurasia. Therefore, South American species should appear as closest relatives of African species when included in the analysis. Presented evidence suggests an ancestral wide distribution of North American representatives of the group, followed by successive contraction, amplification and fragmentation of ranges and speciation events as the result of the intense volcanic activity in the central part of Mexico since late Tertiary, drying climate of Western and Central U.S.A. and North-Western Mexico from the early Eocene to the Pleistocene, and the glaciation during the Pleistocene.
S1197	V. León-Règagnon;S. Guillén-Hernández;M. A. Arizmendi-Espinosa	2004	Intraspecific variation of Haematoloechus floedae. Harwood, 1932 (Digenea: Plagiorchiidae), from Rana spp. In North and Central America	Journal of Parasitology							Haematoloechus floedae was originally described from the lungs of Rana catesbeiana in Texas, and later reported in Florida, U.S.A. It was proposed to be synonymous with H. breviplexus, H. parviplexusand H. varioplexus. We obtained specimens of H. floedae from Rana brownorum and R. vaillanti in Yucatán, Mexico, R. cf. forreri and R. taylori in Guanacaste, Costa Rica, and R. catesbeiana in Georgia and California. Some specimens were processed for morphological study and sequences of the 28S of the rDNA and the mitochondrial COI were obtained from several specimens of each population. Phylogenetic analysis of molecular data indicates studied populations constitute one single taxon, different from H. varioplexus, H. breviplexus and H. parviplexus. Morphological characters that remain constant among populations of H. floedae , and are useful to differentiate this species are oral sucker-pharynx ratio, oral sucker-ventral sucker ratio, ovary and testes shape, extension of uterine longitudinal loops and extension of vitelline follicles (in fully developed worms). Sequence homogeneity among populations of H. floedae suggests a recent spread, maybe due to the introduction of R. catesbeiana for culture to western U.S., south-east Mexico and Costa Rica.
S2056	J. E. Light;J. M. Allen;L. M. Long;T. E. Carter;L. Barrow;G. Suren;D. Raoult;D. L. Reed	2008	Geographic distributions and origins of human head lice (Pediculus humanus capitis) based on mitochondrial data	Journal of Parasitology							Human head lice (Pediculus humanus capitis) are subdivided into 3 deeply divergent mitochondrial clades (Clades A, B, and C), each having unique geographical distributions. Determining the evolutionary history and geographic distribution of these mitochondrial clades can elucidate the evolutionary history of the lice as well as their human hosts. Previous data suggest that lice belonging to mitochondrial Clade B may have originated in North America or Asia; however, geographic sampling and sample sizes have been limited. With newly collected lice, we calculate the relative frequency, geographic distribution, and genetic diversity of louse mitochondrial clades to determine the geographic origin of lice belonging to Clade B. In agreement with previous studies, genetic diversity data support a North American origin of Clade B lice. It is likely that lice belonging to this mitochondrial clade migrated to other geographic localities, e.g., Europe and Australia, recently, and, if not already present, may disperse further to occupy all geographic regions.
S2x6x96c17c51c56	F. W. Zechman;E. C. Theriot;E. A. Zimmer;R. L. Chapman	1990	Phylogeny of the Ulvophyceae (Chlorophyta): Cladistic analysis of nuclear-encoded rRNA sequence data	Journal of Phycology	26		700-710				Cladistic analysis of nuclear-encoded rRNA sequence data provided us with the basis for some new hypotheses of relationships within the green algal class Ulvophyceae. The orders Ulotrichales and Ulvales are separated from the clade formed by the remaining orders of siphonous and siphonocladous Ulvophyceae (Caulerpales, Siphonocladales/Cladophorales [S/C] complex, and the Dasycladales), by the Chlorophyceae and Pleurastrophyceae. Our results suggest that the Ulvophyceae is not a monophyletic group. Examination of inter- and intra- ordinal relationships within the siphonous and siphonocladous ulvophycean algae revealed that Cladophora, Chaetomorpha, Anadyomene, Microdictyon, Cladophoropsis and Dictyosphaeria form a clade. Thus the hypothesis, based on ultrastructural features, that the Siphonocladales and Cladophorales are closely related is supported. Also, the Caulerpales is a monophyletic group with two lineages; Caulerpa, Halimeda, and Udotea comprise one, and Bryopsis and Codium comprise the other. The Dasycladales (Cymopolia and Batophora) also forms a clade, but this clade is not inferred to be the sister group to the S/C complex as has been proposed. Instead, it is either the sister taxon to the Caulerpales or basal to the Caulerpales and S/C clade. The Trentepohliales is also included at the base of the siphonous and siphonocladous ulvophycean clade. The Pleurastrophyceae, which, like the Ulvophyceae, possess a counter-clockwise arrangement of flagellar basal bodies, are more closely related to the Chlorophyceae than to the Ulvophyceae based on rRNA sequences. Thus, the arrangement of basal bodies does not diagnose a monophyletic group. Previously reported hypotheses of phylogenetic relationships of ulvophycean algae were tested. In each case, additional evolutionary steps were required to obtain the proposed relationships. Relationships of ulvophycean algae to other classes of green algae are discussed.
S442	S. Watanabe;A. Himizu;L. A. Lewis;G. L. Floyd;P. A. Fuerst	2000	Pseudoneochloris marina (Chlorophyta), a New Coccoid Ulvophycean Alga, and its Phylogenetic Position Inferred from Morphological and Molecular Data	Journal of Phycology	36	3	596-604	10.1046/j.1529-8817.2000.99123.x		18S ribosomal RNA; flagellar apparatus; Neochloris; Pseudoneochloris; ultrastructure; Ulvophyceae	Ultrastructural and molecular sequence data were used to assess the phylogenetic position of the coccoid green alga deposited in the culture collection of the University of Texas at Austin under the name of Neochloris sp. (1445). This alga has uninucleate vegetative cells and a parietal chloroplast with pyrenoids; it reproduces by forming naked biflagellate zoospores. Electron microscopy revealed that zoospores have basal bodies displaced in the counterclockwise absolute orientation and overlapped at their proximal ends. Four microtubular rootlets numbering 2 and 2/1 are alternatively arranged in a cruciate pattern. A system I fiber extends beneath each d rootlet and a system II fiber (rhizoplast) originates from each basal body and extends peripherally along each d rootlet. These features differ substantially from those of the three genera, Ettlia (Komárek) Deason et al., Neochloris (Starr) Deason et al., and Parietochloris Watanabe et Floyd, all of which were previously accommodated in the single genus Neochloris Starr. Sequence data from the nuclear small subunit ribosomal RNA gene were obtained and compared with published green algal sequences. Results from the ultrastructural and sequence data support the placement of Neochloris sp. (The Culture Collection of Algae at the University of Texas at Austin [UTEX] no. 1445) in the Ulvophyceae. This isolate is described as Pseudoneochloris marina, gen. et sp. nov. in the Ulotrichales, Ulvophyceae.
S698	M. A. Buchheim;E. A. Michalopulos;J. A. Buchheim	2001	Phylogeny of the Chlorophyceae with special reference to the Sphaeropleales: A study of 18S and 26S rDNA data	Journal of Phycology	37	5	819-835	10.1046/j.1529-8817.2001.00162.x		18S rDNA; 26S rDNA; Ankyra; Atractomorpha; Chaetopeltidales; Chaetophorales; Chlamydomonadales; Cylindrocapsa; Elakatothrix; flagellar apparatus; Oedogoniales; Ourococcus; phylogeny; Pseudoschroederia; pyrenoid; Schroederia; Sphaeroplea; Sphaeropleales	Ultrastructural analyses of the flagellar apparatus suggested that Sphaeroplea, Atractomorpha, the Hydrodictyaceae, and the Neochloridaceae, all of which produce biflagellate motile cells with directly-opposed (DO) basal bodies, are allied in an order Sphaeropleales. Recent studies of 18S rDNA sequence data supported an alliance of the DO group, but no data from Sphaeroplea and its allies were included. This investigation presented a test of the phylogenetic hypothesis suggested by the flagellar apparatus evidence using sequence data from the nuclear-encoded, small-subunit rDNA (18S) and large subunit rDNA (26S) genes, combined with additional taxon sampling. Results from phylogenetic analyses weakly supported monophyly of biflagellate DO taxa and indicated that pyrenoids with cytoplasmic invaginations are present in numerous, distinct lineages. Analysis of both molecular data sets supported a class Chlorophyceae comprised of at least six major groups that generally correspond to currently recognized orders or families: Chaetophorales, Chaetopeltidales, Chlamydomonadales, Sphaeropleales, Sphaeropleaceae and Oedogoniales. In addition, Cylindrocapsa, Elakatothrix, Treubaria and Trochiscia formed a seventh chlorophycean clade that is new to science. This investigation demonstrated that the 26S rDNA gene provides more phylogenetic signal, per unit sequence, than the 18S rDNA gene and that combined analysis yields topologies with more robust support than independent analysis of either data set.
S610	A. W. Coleman	2001	Biogeography and Speciation in the Pandorina/Volvulina (Chlorophyta) Superclade	Journal of Phycology	37	5	836-851	10.1046/j.1529-8817.2001.01043.x		biogeography; ITS; Pandorina; Volvulina; Volvocaceae; phylogenetics; speciation; Yamagishiella	Mating affinity, nuclear rDNA internal transcribed spacer (ITS) sequence, and geographic distribution of more than 100 isolates of Pandorina, Volvulina, and Yamagishiella were determined. Comparative analysis of ITS sequences reaffirmed the unity of Pandorina morum and its separation from all other species of Volvocaceae except those of Volvulina. This latter genus, represented by four species, appears to represent only morphological variants of several P. morum subclades. The P. morum clade (including also additional species such as P. smithii and P. colemaniae) encompasses an evolutionary span, as determined by comparison of ITS, greater than either of the multispecies genera Gonium or Eudorina. There are at least 30 Pandorina/Volvulina syngens, sexually isolated groups, so far as can be determined, among the current collection of strains. In addition, as in other volvocacaean genera, two clones are homothallic, capable of forming zygotes within a genetic clone. The existence of so many syngens suggests that considerable evolutionary diversification of the genes controlling gamete compatibility and intercross survival has occurred, unaccompanied by significant morphological change. Within each syngen, genetic distance increases with geographic distance between collection sites. At least half of the isolates studied must have been introduced northward since the Pleistocene. Although we probably know more about characters in this group of algae than any other algal group, in part because they are so easy to culture, we are still largely ignorant of what circumscribes their niche in nature. The study of all these organisms, distributed throughout the world presumably by the activities of shorebirds, emphasizes the evolutionary role of mating genes in the inevitable formation of new genetically isolated subclades in these eukaryotes and provides initial data on their rate of appearance versus their rate of distribution over the earth.
S549	A. W. Coleman;L. Jaenicke;R. C. Starr	2001	Genetics and sexual behavior of the pheromone producer, Chlamydomonas allensworthii (Chlorophyceae)	Journal of Phycology	37	2	345-349	10.1046/j.1529-8817.2001.00164.x	http://www3.interscience.wiley.com/journal/118994344/abstract	Chlamydomonas; internal transcribed spacer; pheromone; Volvocales	Strains of Chlamydomonas allensworthii Starr, Marner, and Jaenike isolated from 13 sites worldwide in distribution were compared to assess the congruity of DNA similarity, sexual behavior, and pheromone response type. The isolates fell into two pheromone response categories. One of these included isolates of widespread distribution in the United States, and all appeared to be capable of forming zygotes inter se. The second group was larger and more complex, encompassing four mating groups as defined by zygote formation. Comparison of DNA sequences (internal transcribed spacers 1 and 2 of the nuclear rDNA repeats) fully supported the same subdivision of the isolates. Both selfing and outbreeding clones were among the isolates. The possibility that other Volvocales species might respond to these same pheromones remains to be tested.
S664	L. Krienitz;I. Ustinova;T. Friedl;V. A. R. Huss	2001	Traditional generic concepts versus 18S rRNA gene phylogeny in the green algal family Selenastraceae (Chlorophyceae, Chlorophyta)	Journal of Phycology	37	5	852-865	10.1046/j.1529-8817.2001.01004.x		18S rRNA; Ankistrodesmus; Chlorophyta; Kirchneriella; Monoraphidium; molecular systematics; morphology; Podohedriella; pyrenoid; Quadrigula; Selenastraceae	Coccoid green algae of the Selenastraceae were investigated by means of light microscopy, TEM, and 18S rRNA analyses to evaluate the generic concept in this family. Phylogenetic trees inferred from the 18S rRNA gene sequences showed that the studied species of autosporic Selenastraceae formed a well-resolved monophyletic clade within the DO group of Chlorophyceae. Several morphological characteristics that are traditionally used as generic features were investigated, especially the arrangement of autospores in the mother cells, colony formation, and pyrenoid structure. The parallel arrangement of autospores was confirmed for the genera Ankistrodesmus, Podohedriella, and Quadrigula. In mother cells of Monoraphidium and Kirchneriella, the autospores were arranged serially. Colony formation was either stable (Quadrigula) or variable (Ankistrodesmus, Podohedriella) within genera. All strains studied possessed naked or starch-covered pyrenoids within the chloroplast. The pyrenoid matrix was homogenous or penetrated by thylakoids. In contrast to considerations of traditional systematics, the present study showed that the presence and structure of pyrenoids are unsuitable for differentiation of genera in Selenastraceae. Furthermore, the molecular analyses showed that any morphological criterion considered so far is not significant for the systematics of the Selenastraceae on the generic level. Species assigned to different genera such as Ankistrodesmus and Monoraphidium were not monophyletic and therefore not distinguishable as separate genera. Species of Monoraphidium appeared in four different lineages of the Selenastraceae. Our phylogenetic analyses support earlier discussions to abandon the common practice of conceiving "small" genera (i.e. genera that are differentiated from other genera by only a few diacritic characteristics and that contain only a small number of species) and to reestablish "large" genera of Selenastraceae such as Ankistrodesmus.
S855	M. Marston;M. Villalard-Bohnsack	2002	Genetic variability and potential sources of Grateloupia doryphora (Halymeniaceae, Rhodophyta), an invasive species in Rhode Island waters (USA)	Journal of Phycology	38	4	649-658	10.1046/j.1529-8817.2002.01063.x		genetic diversity; Grateloupia doryphora; ITS sequences; mitochondrial sequences; origin of invasive species; RAPDs; red alga	Grateloupia doryphora (Montagne) M.Howe is an invasive foliose alga that was reported for the first time in Rhode Island, USA in 1997. The population has since increased in size and expanded in range. In this study, the genetic variation and potential sources of the Rhode Island G. doryphora population were examined using three types of molecular markers: randomly amplified polymorphic DNA (RAPD), nuclear internal transcribed spacer (ITS) sequences, and mitochondrial cox2-cox3 intergenic spacer (COX) sequences. No variation was detected in ITS or COX sequences among Rhode Island G. doryphora individuals. RAPDs, however, did reveal genetic variation, although banding patterns were similar, with RAPD genetic distances between individuals ranging from 0.00 to 0.17. The low level of genetic diversity observed within the Rhode Island population may be due to a small founder population or a founder population derived from a genetically uniform source. To identify possible sources of the Rhode Island invasion, individuals from nine geographically diverse populations of foliose Grateloupia were compared. Phylogenetic trees inferred from RAPD distances, ITS and COX sequences had similar topologies and thus there was phylogenetic congruence among these independent loci. The Rhode Island G. doryphora specimens were genetically similar to specimens from G. doryphora populations located in Portsmouth, England; Tholen Island, The Netherlands; and Brittany and Hérault, France. Interestingly, the G. doryphora population in each of these locations is itself due to an introduction event within the past 40 years.
S586	S. R. Santos;D. J. Taylor;M. A. Coffroth	2002	Genetic comparisons of freshly isolated vs. cultured symbiotic dinoflagellates: Implications for extrapolation to the intact symbiosis	Journal of Phycology	37	5	900-912	10.1046/j.1529-8817.2001.00194.x		culture; internal transcribed spacer; microsatellites; small subunit rDNA genes; Symbiodinium; symbiosis; symbiotic dinoflagellates; zooxanthellae	ooxanthellae, algal symbionts in divergent marine invertebrate hosts, are a genetically heterogeneous group. All species descriptions and most physiological and infectivity studies of zooxanthellae have been conducted using cultured material. However, few studies have attempted to quantify the representation of cultures isolated from cnidarians to the in hospite zooxanthella populations of the individual host or host species from which they were established. RFLPs of small subunit (18S) rDNA, internal transcribed spacer (ITS)-rDNA sequence data, and microsatellite analyses were conducted to assess the relatedness between cultured zooxanthellae and the in hospite populations of the individual host or host species from which they were isolated. RFLP data demonstrated that cultures may represent either the numerically dominant symbiont or ones present in lower number. ITS-rDNA sequences from zooxanthella cultures were disconcordant with ITS-rDNA sequences identified from in hospite zooxanthellae of the same host species, and microsatellites present in in hospite zooxanthella populations were absent from the corresponding cultures. Finally, reexamination of the literature revealed examples of zooxanthella cultures being nonrepresentative of in hospite populations. These data suggest that, in most cases, cultures are a subset of the original in hospite population. Factors such as failing to homogenize bulk cultures before transfer, growth medium used, and the picking of single motile cells may contribute to many zooxanthella cultures being nonrepresentative.
S927	A. Behnke;V. A. Chepurnov;T. Friedl;D. G. Mann	2003	Reproductive compatibility and rDNA sequence analyses in the Sellaphora pupula species complex (Bacillariophyta)	Journal of Phycology							In the Sellaphora pupula complex, a model system for investigations of the species concept and speciation in diatoms, it was tested in this study whether ITS rDNA sequence differences are correlated with sexual compatibility. Also the phylogenetic stucture among the demes and the phylogenetic position of the genus within the raphid diatoms was investigated. The division of clones of S. pupula and S. laevissima into groups, based on sequence similarities and phylogenetic analyses, reflected a grouping as based on sexual compatibility: a high ITS sequence divergence was found among clones whose gametangia do not interact, making full alignment difficult or impossible, while there was little sequence divergence among interfertile clones. This is clearly consistent with the idea that 'Z clades' exhibit less intraclade than interclade variation in ITS and, as comparisons of secondary structure models for the RECT and PSEUDOCAP clones showed, that there is an equivalence of 'CBC and Z-clades' in the rectangular and pseudocapitate demes of S. pupula, as earlier hypothesized for chlorophytes. Intraclonal, presumably intraindividual, variation in ITS was found in S. pupula with a degree of variation less than that found within a single Z clade and it was too minor to affect the interclonal relationships in the ITS phylogeny. Sellaphora, which appears monophyletic in 18S phylogenies and with Pinnularia and Navicula pelliculosa as its closest allies, may also include some species currently classified in Eolimna. The S. pupula-S. laevissima group began to diversify in or before the Miocene.
S783	L. R. Goertzen;E. C. Theriot	2003	Effect of taxon sampling, character weighting, and combined data on the interpretation of relationships among the heterokont algae	Journal of Phycology	39	2	423-443	10.1046/j.1529-8817.2003.01238.x	http://www3.interscience.wiley.com/journal/118832803/abstract	bootstrap support; Chromista; combined data; heterokont algae; molecular phylogeny; rbcL; ribosomal DNA; stramenopiles; taxon sampling	Nuclear ribosomal small subunit and chloroplast rbcL sequence data for heterokont algae and potential outgroup taxa were analyzed separately and together using maximum parsimony. A series of taxon sampling and character weighting experiments was performed. Traditional classes (e.g. diatoms, Phaeophyceae, etc.) were monophyletic in most analyses of either data set and in analyses of combined data. Relationships among classes and of heterokont algae to outgroup taxa were sensitive to taxon sampling. Bootstrap (BS) values were not always predictive of stability of nodes in taxon sampling experiments or between analyses of different data sets. Reweighting sites by the rescaled consistency index artificially inflates BS values in the analysis of rbcL data. Inclusion of the third codon position from rbcL enhanced signal despite the superficial appearance of mutational saturation. Incongruence between data sets was largely due to placement of a few problematic taxa, and so data were combined. BS values for the combined analysis were much higher than for analyses of each data set alone, although combining data did not improve support for heterokont monophyly.
S967	C. F. D. Gurgel;S. Fredericq;J. N. Norris	2003	Phylogeography of Gracilaria tikvahiae (Gracilariaceae, Rhodophyta): a study of genetic discontinuity in a continuously distributed species based on molecular evidence	Journal of Phycology							Gracilaria tikvahiae, a highly morphologically variable red alga, is one of the most common species of Gracilariaceae inhabiting Atlantic estuarine environments and the Intracoastal Waterway of eastern North America. Populations of G. tikvahiae at the extremes of their geographic range (Canada and southern Mexico) are subjected to very different environmental regimes. In this study we used two types of genetic markers, the chloroplast-encoded rbcL and the nuclear ITS region, to examine the genetic variability within G. tikvahiae, to infer the taxonomic and phylogenetic relationships between geographically isolated populations and discuss its distributional information in a phylogeographic framework. Based on rbcL and ITS phylogenies, specimens from populations collected at the extreme distributional ranges reported for G. tikvahiae are indeed part of the same species; however, rbcL but not ITS based-phylogenies, detected phylogenetic structure among the 14 G. tikvahiae haplotypes found in this study. The four distinct rbcL lineages were identified as: (1) a Canadian-northeast US lineage; (2) a southeast Florida lineage; (3) an eastern Gulf of Mexico lineage; and, (4) a western Gulf of Mexico lineage. We found no evidence of G. tikvahiae occurrence in the Caribbean Sea. The genetic disjunctions coincide with hypothesized geographic barriers to gene flow, such as the southern tip of the Florida Peninsula and the mouth of the Mississippi River in the northern Gulf of Mexico. Observed phylogeographic patterns match patterns of genetic structures reported for marine animal taxa with continuous and quasi-continuous geographic distribution along the same geographic ranges.
S845	J. D. Hackett;L. Maranda;H. S. Yoon;D. Bhattacharya	2003	Phylogenetic evidence for the cryptophyte origin of the plastid of Dinophysis (Dinophysiales, Dinophyceae	Journal of Phycology							Photosynthetic members of the genus Dinophysis Ehrenberg contain a plastid of uncertain origin. Ultrastructure and pigment analyses suggest that the two-membrane-bound plastid of Dinophysis spp. has been acquired through endosymbiosis from a cryptophyte. However, these organisms do not survive in culture, raising the possibility that Dinophysis spp. have a transient kleptoplast. To test the origin and permanence of the plastid of Dinophysis, we sequenced plastid-encoded psbA and SSU rDNA from single cell isolates of D. acuminata ClaparËde et Lachman, D. acuta Ehrenberg, and D. norvegica ClaparËde et Lachman. Phylogenetic analyses confirm the cryptophyte origin of the plastid. Plastid sequences from different populations isolated at different times are monophyletic with robust support and show limited polymorphism. DNA sequencing also revealed plastid sequences of florideophyte origin, indicating that Dinophysis may be feeding on red algae.
S990	A. J. Haywood;K. A. Steidinger;E. W. Truby;P. R. Bergquist;P. L. Bergquist;J. Adamson;L. MacKenzie	2003	Comparative Morphology and Molecular Phylogenetic Analyses of Three New Species of the genus Karenia (Dinophyceae) from New Zealand	Journal of Phycology							Three new dinoflagellate species Karenia papilionacea sp. nov., Karenia selliformis sp. nov. and Karenia bidigitata sp. nov. were compared with the toxic species Karenia mikimotoi (Miyake & Kominami ex Oda), Karenia brevis (Davis) and Karenia brevisulcata (Chang) using the same fixative. Distinguishing morphological characters for the genus Karenia included a smooth theca and a linear apical groove. The new species can be distinguished on the basis of morphological characters of vegetative cells that include; the location and shape of the nucleus, the relative excavation of the hypotheca, the characteristics of apical and sulcal groove extensions on the epitheca, the cellular shape, size and symmetry, degree of dorsoventral compression, and presence of an apical protrusion or carina. Species with pronounced dorso-ventral compression swim in a distinctive fluttering motion. An inter-cingulartubular structure (ICTS) traversing the proximal and distal ends of the cingulum is common to the species of Karenia, Karlodinium micrum (Leadbeater & Dodge) J. Larsen, Gymnodinium pulchellum J. Larsen and Gyrodinium corsicum Paulmier. Molecular phylogenetic analyses of rDNA sequence alignments shows that the new species are phylogenetically distinct but closely related to K. mikimotoi and K. brevis.
S800	M. A. Nudelman;M. S. Rossi;V. Conforti;R. E. Triemer	2003	Phylogeny of Euglenophyceae based on SSU rDNA sequences: taxonomic implications	Journal of Phycology	39	1	226-235	10.1046/j.1529-8817.2003.02075.x		euglenoids; Euglenophyta; Euglenozoa; molecular phylogeny; SSU rDNA	Small subunit rDNA sequences of 42 taxa belonging to 10 genera were used to infer phylogenetic relationships among euglenoids. Members of the phototrophic genera Euglena, Phacus, Lepocinclis, Colacium, Trachelomonas, and Strombomonas plus the osmotrophs Astasia longa, Khawkinea quartana, and Hyalophacus ocellatus were included. Six major clades were found in most trees using multiple methods. The utility of Bayesian analyses in resolving these clades is demonstrated. The genus Phacus was polyphyletic with taxa sorting into two main clades. The two clades correlated with overall morphology and corresponded in large part to the previously defined sections, Pleur- aspis Pochmann and Proterophacus Pochmann. Euglena was also polyphyletic and split into two clades. In Bayesian analyses species with less plastic pellicles and small disk-like chloroplasts diverged at the base of the tree. They grouped into a single clade which included the two Lepocinclis spp., which also are rigid and bear similar chloroplasts. The metabolic Euglena species with larger plastids bearing pyrenoids and paramylon caps arose near the top of the tree. The loricates Strombomonas and Trachelomonas formed two well- supported, but paraphyletic, clades. The strong support for the individual clades confirmed the value of using lorica features as taxonomic criteria. The separation of the osmotrophic species A. longa, K. quartana, and H. ocellatus into different clades suggested that the loss of the photosynthetic ability has occurred multiple times.
S798	A. R. Sherwood;R. G. Sheath	2003	Systematics of the Hildenbrandiales (Rhodophyta): gene sequence and morphometric analyses of global collections	Journal of Phycology	39	2	409-422	10.1046/j.1529-8817.2003.01050.x	http://www3.interscience.wiley.com/journal/118832798/abstract	18S rRNA gene; Apophlaea; Hildenbrandia; Hildenbrandiales; morphometrics; rbcL gene; systematics	Fifty-seven collections of marine and freshwater Hildenbrandia from North America, South America, Europe, and Africa were compared with 21 type and historically important specimens using multivariate morphometrics. Additionally, phylogenetic analyses of 48 specimens of Hildenbrandia and two specimens of Apophlaea were carried out based on sequences of the rbcL chloroplast gene and the nuclear 18S rRNA gene. Morphometric analyses based on vegetative cell and filament dimensions distinguished two groups of freshwater Hildenbrandia specimens, the first corresponding to those collections from North America and the Philippines and the second to those from Europe and the Canary Islands. The first group had smaller mean cell and filament dimensions (cells 4.0 × 4.4 μm, filaments 46.5 μm) and corresponded to H. angolensis, whereas the second group had larger mean dimensions (cells 5.8 × 6.6 μm, filaments 55.3 μm) and represented H. rivularis. Marine specimens were morphometrically distinguishable into two groups based on tetrasporangial division pattern as well as other thallus characters. However, measurements and character determinations of some type specimens differed greatly from the original descriptions, and thus further work to determine the stability of these characters is required. Phylogenetic reconstruction based on the 18S rRNA gene and rbcL gene sequence data generally demonstrated separation of the marine and freshwater forms of Hildenbrandia, with some marine taxa forming monophyletic groups (e.g. H. lecannellieri and H. occidentalis) and others forming paraphyletic groups (e.g. H. rubra). The two specimens of Apophlaea formed a monophyletic group within the paraphyletic genus Hildenbrandia.
S979	S. Shoup;L. A. Lewis	2003	Polyphyletic origin of parallel basal bodies in swimming cells of chlorophycean green algae (Chlorophyta)	Journal of Phycology	39		789-796				The evolutionary affinities of Heterochlamydomonas Cox and Deason and Dictyochloris Vischer ex Starr were investigated using phylogenetic analyses of combined data set of 18S and 28S ribosomal DNA sequences with those from 38 additional green algae. Previous ultrastructural studies have shown that motile cells of Heterochlamydomonas and Dictyochloris have an unusual flagellar apparatus organization in that the two flagella are of unequal length and are the basal bodies are persistently parallel. Because of this similarity, these taxa along with Bracteacoccus Tereg, a third taxon with this same flagellar apparatus arrangement, were hypothesized to be closely related. We show, with maximum parsimony and Bayesian analyses, that the parallel basal bodies are not homologous in the three genera. Rather, Heterochlamydomonas is most closely related to Chlamydomonas baca in the clockwise flagellar apparatus clade, and Dictyochloris and Bracteacoccus are nested within the Sphaeropleales, which has the directly opposite flagellar absolute orientation. Surprisingly, Dictyochloris and Bracteacoccus are not supported as closest relatives. These relationships are supported by certain morphological features such as the presence or absence of a walled motile cell, but not by the orientation of basal bodies. In addition, our data are derived from multiple isolates of each of the study genera and the analyses show that Heterochlamydomonas and Dictyochloris are each monophyletic.
S1095	G. Y. Cho;S. H. Lee;S. M. Boo	2004	A new brown algal order, Ishigeales (Phaeophyceae), established on the basis of plastid protein-coding rbcL, psaA, and psbA region comparisons	Journal of Phycology							The brown algal family Ishigeaceae currently includes a single genus, Ishige Yendo, with two species, which inhabit the warm waters of Korea, China, Japan, and the northeastern Pacific coast of America. The relationship of the family to other brown algal lineages is less studied in terms of their plastid ultrastructure and molecular phylogeny. We determined the sequences of rbcL from four samples of the two Ishige species and nine putative relatives, and the sequences of psaA and psbA sequences from 37 representatives of the brown algae. Analyses of the rbcL, psaA, psbA, and rbcL + psaA + psbA data sets resulted in similar trees, however, the concatenated data gave greater resolution and clade support than each individual gene. In all the phylogenies reconstructed from individual and combined data sets, the Phaeophyceae was well resolved, the Ectocarpales being placed in a terminal position, and the Ishigeaceae ending up in a basal position. The exclusion of the Ishigeaceae from the Ectocarpales s.l. or putative relatives was supported by the Shimodaira-Hasegawa tests, using the combined data set. From our ultrastructural study, we concluded that the pyrenoid is absent in the Ishigeaceae, despite the presence of a rudimentary pyrenoid in I. okamurae. These results suggest that the Ishigeaceae, sharing apical growth, pyrenoidless plastids, and isomorphic life history with most of basal brown algae, is an early-diverging brown lineage. Our molecular and morphological data, therefore, lead us to exclude the Ishigeaceae from the Ectocarpales s.l., which have an elaborate pyrenoid, and to propose its own order Ishigeales ord. nov. The order Ishigeales is distinguished by oligostichous structure of thalli, phaeophycean hairs formed within cryptostomata, unilocular sporangia transformed from terminal cortical cells, and plurilocular sporangia lacking sterile terminal cells. This study is the first to document the utility of the psaA and psbA sequences for phylogenetic studies of brown algae and also the first report on the multigene phylogeny of the Phaeophyceae based on three protein-coding plastid genes.
S1124	H. Kawai;H. Sasaki	2004	Morphology, life history and molecular phylogeny of Stschapovia flagellaris (Tilopteridales, Phaeophyceae)	Journal of Phycology							The phenology, life history, ultrastructure of reproductive structures, and molecular phylogeny using rbcL and rDNA (5.8S, ITS2 and partial 26S) gene sequences of Stschapovia flagellaris , endemic to northwestern Pacific, were studied. This species was first classified in the order Delamareales Zinova together with Delamarea, Coelocladia and Cladothele. Those three genera, however, were later transferred to Dictyosiphonales while the systematic position of Stschapovia remained unclear. At Abashiri, Hokkaido, Japan, the species regenerated by forming a new erect thallus from a perennial crustose holdfast, or by presumably parthenogenetic development of eggs released from the erect thallus. There was no alternation of generations. In winter, the monoecious erect thallus formed reproductive structures (i.e. plurilocular antheridia and oogonia) in the thickened part of the thallus. Sperm had a chloroplast with an eyespot, and a long anterior and short posterior flagellum. Eggs contained numerous disc-shaped chloroplasts, physodes and vacuoles. No sexual attraction of the presumptive sperm by eggs nor their sexual fusion were observed. Molecular phylogenetic analyses revealed the closest phylogenetic relationship between Stschapovia and Halosiphonaceae, and formed a monophyletic clade with Phyllariaceae and Tilopteridales sensu stricto. Stschapovia and Tilopteridaceae have several important morphological similarities: chloroplasts lacking pyrenoids, lack of sexual reproduction despite the release of obvious sperm, occurrence of monoecious gametophytes, and similarity in the early developmental pattern of the erect thallus. In conclusion, we propose the establishment of the new family Stschapoviaceae to accommodate Stschapovia and to place the family in the order Tilopteridales together with Tilopteridaceae, Halosiphonaceae and Phyllariaceae.
S1208	W. H. C. F. Kooistra;H. Verbruggen	2004	Genetic patterns in the calcified tropical seaweeds Halimeda opuntia, H. distorta, H. hederacea and H. minima (Bryopsidales, Chlorophyta) provide insights in species boundaries and inter-oceanic dispersal	Journal of Phycology	41	1					The section Opuntia within the green seaweed genus Halimeda includes sprawling and pendant thalli composed of strongly calcified segments. Within this section, identification of Atlantic material is straightforward but Indo-Pacific material is often difficult to key out. This is particularly true for specimens resembling H. opuntia, H. distorta and H. hederacea; many specimens do not fit the types or are morphologically intermediate. The goals of the present study are to define morphologically and genetically distinct groups among such specimens and to assess phylogeographic patterns within these groups. Specimens were collected throughout the geographical and morphological range. Sequences of H. minima and H. gracilis were included as outgroups. Two morphological groups were discerned within the ingroup; the first fitted H. opuntia whereas most specimens in the second group, referred to as the distorta-hederacea complex, did not fit any species description unambiguously. The latter were subdivided into two subgroups corresponding more or less to H. hederacea and H. distorta, yet intermediates between these morphs existed. A phylogeny inferred from partial nuclear rDNA sequences showed one lineage with H. opuntia and a second one containing the distorta-hederacea complex, thus corroborating the two major morphological groups. The distorta-hederacea complex contained two clades that show only partial correspondence with the morphological subgroups. Therefore, H. hederacea is synonymized with H. distorta. Phylogeographic structure within H. opuntia indicated that this species dispersed from the Indo-Pacific into the Atlantic. Fossil records of the species also show occurrence at Pacific sites throughout the last 10^5 years and a sudden appearance in the Caribbean and Bahamas during the last millennium.
S1006	C. J. O'Kelly;W. K. Bellows;B. Wysor	2004	Phylogenetic position of Bolbocoleon piliferum (Ulvophyceae, Chlorophyta): evidence from reproduction, zoospore and gamete ultrastructure, and SSU ribosomal RNA gene sequences	Journal of Phycology	40						Aspects of the reproduction of Bolbocoleon piliferum N. Pringsheim, a common, small, filamentous, endophytic marine green alga, were examined by light and transmission electron microscopy. These observations were combined with phylogenetic analysis of nuclear-encoded SSU rRNA gene sequences to assess the phylogenetic position of B. piliferum. Quadriflagellate zoospores and planozygotes derived from fusion of isogametes yielded plants with identical morphology. Zoosporangia and gametangia divided by sequential cleavages. Plugs at the apices of zoosporangia and gametangia formed during development; tubes were found at zoosporangial and gametangial apices after swarmer release. Flagellar apparatuses of zoospores and gametes were similar to those of algae in the Ulvales (Ulvophyceae), except that terminal caps were entire rather than bilobed, and rhizoplasts and stacked microtubular root configurations were absent. Structures associated with planozygotes were identical with those observed in other algae currently assigned to Ulotrichales and Ulvales. Molecular phylogenetic analyses placed B. piliferum within the Ulvophyceae, at the base of a clade that contains representatives of the families Ulvaceae, Ulvellaceae and Kornmanniaceae. The results support an earlier hypothesis that B. piliferum constitutes a distinct lineage. Analyses including Kornmanniaceae recover monophyletic Ulotrichales and Ulvales, whereas analyses omitting the Kornmanniaceae indicate that Ulotrichales is paraphyletic. The structures associated with gamete fusion are conserved within Ulotrichales and Ulvales, and perhaps more widely within Chlorophyta.
S1057	C. J. O'Kelly;B. Wysor;W. K. Bellows	2004	Gene sequence diversity and the phylogenetic position of algae assigned to the genera Phaeophila and Ochlochaete (Ulvophyceae, Chlorophyta)	Journal of Phycology							The phylogenetic position of microfilamentous marine green algae assigned to the species Phaeophila dendroides (Crouan et Crouan) Batters, Entocladia tenuis Kylin (Phaeophila tenuis (Kylin) Nielsen), and Ochlochaete hystrix Thwaites was examined through phylogenetic analyses of nuclear-encoded SSU rRNA and chloroplast-encoded tufA gene sequences. These analyses placed the P. dendroides strains within the Ulvophyceae, at the base of a clade that contains representatives of the families Ulvaceae, Ulvellaceae and the species Bolbocoleon piliferum, supporting an earlier hypothesis that P. dendroides constitutes a distinct lineage. Substantial divergence in both nuclear and plastid DNA sequences exists among strains of Phaeophila dendroides from different geographic localities, but these isolated strains are morphologically indistinguishable. The lineage may have an accelerated rate of gene sequence evolution relative to other microfilamentous marine green algae. Entocladia tenuis and Ochlochaete hystrix are placed neither in the P. dendroides clade nor in the Ulvellaceae as previous taxonomic schemes predicted, but instead form a new clade or clades at the base of the Ulvaceae. Ruthnielsenia gen. nov. is proposed to accommodate Kylin's species, which cannot be placed in Entocladia (= Acrochaete), Phaeophila or Ochlochaete. Ruthnielsenia tenuis (Kylin) comb. nov., previously known only from Atlantic coasts, is reported for the first time from the Pacific coast of North America (San Juan Island, Washington, USA). Isolates of R. tenuis from the Atlantic and Pacific coasts of North America have identical SSU rRNA and tufA gene sequences.
S1063	H. H. Senousy;G. W. Beakes;E. Hack	2004	Phylogenetic placement of Botryococcus braunii (Trebouxiophyceae) and Botryococcus sudeticus isolate UTEX 2629 (Chlorophyceae)	Journal of Phycology	40		412-423				The phylogenetic placement of four isolates of Botryococcus braunii K¸tzing and of Botryococcus sudeticus Lemmermann isolate UTEX 2629 was investigated using sequences of the nuclear small subunit (18S) rRNA gene. The B. braunii isolates represent the A (two isolates), B, and L chemical races. One isolate of B. braunii (CCAP 807/1; A race) has a group I intron at Escherichia coli position 1046 and isolate UTEX 2629 has group I introns at E. coli positions 516 and 1512. The rRNA sequences were aligned with 53 previously reported rRNA sequences from members of the Chlorophyta, including one reported for B. braunii (Berkeley strain). Phylogenetic trees were constructed using distance, weighted maximum parsimony, and maximum likelihood, and their reliability was estimated using bootstrap analysis for distance and parsimony and Bayesian inference for likelihood. All methods showed, with high bootstrap or credibility support, that the four isolates of B. braunii form a monophyletic group whose closest relatives are in the genus Choricystis in the Trebouxiophyceae, whereas the previously reported B. braunii sequence is from a member of the Chlamydomonadales in the Chlorophyceae and isolate UTEX 2629 is a member of the Sphaeropleales in the Chlorophyceae. Polyphyly of these sequences was confirmed by Kishino-Hasegawa tests on artificial trees in which sequences were moved to a single lineage.
S1018	W. Shin;R. E. Triemer	2004	Phylogenetic analysis of the genus Euglena (Euglenophyceae) with particular reference to the type species Euglena viridis	Journal of Phycology							Euglena viridis (subgenus Euglena), serves as the type species for the genus Euglena. In this study, molecular phylogenetic analyses using an SSU and a combined SSU/partial LSU rDNA dataset for members of the genus Euglena showed that strains identified as E. viridis on the basis of morphology, are distributed between two separate, non-sister clades. Although all of the E. viridis strains examined were morphologically indistinguishable and possessed spherical mucocysts and stellate chloroplasts with one paramylon center, there was a high degree of sequence divergence between the E. viridis strains in different clades making this a cryptic species. Like E. viridis, all taxa from the subgenus Euglena, are characterized by having one or more stellate chloroplasts with paramylon grains clustered around the center of the chloroplast. These additional taxa divided into four clades in all of the molecular analyses. Strains of Euglena stellata formed two clades whose members had a single aggregate chloroplast with paramylon center and spindle-shaped mucocysts. A “geniculata” clade included species with one or two stellate chloroplasts with paramylon centers and spherical mucocysts and the “cantabrica” clade had members with one stellate chloroplast with paramylon center and spherical mucocysts arranged in a definite pattern. Interspersed among these, were three more clades bearing taxa from the subgenus Calliglena which contains members with discoid plastids with pyrenoids which may or may not be capped with paramylon. These taxa formed a “laciniata” clade , a “mutabilis” clade and “gracilis” clade. This study demonstrates that E. viridis and possibly E. stellata, are cryptic species that can only be distinugished at the molecular level. Because E. viridis is the designated type species for the genus Euglena, we designated an epitype for E. viridis.
S1485	A. J. Alverson;L. Kolnick	2005	Intragenomic nucleotide polymorphism among SSU rDNA paralogs in the diatom genus Skeletonema	Journal of Phycology	41		1248-1257				Morphological features of the siliceous cell wall traditionally have been used to diagnose and classify species of diatoms, though an increasing number of studies distinguish new species, in part, by phylogenetic analysis of rDNA sequences. Intragenomic sequence variation is common among the hundreds to thousands of rDNA cistrons present within a genome, and this variation has strong potential to obscure species boundaries based on rDNA sequences. We screened six Skeletonema culture strains for intragenomic nucleotide polymorphisms in the SSU rDNA gene and found that all strains had polymorphic sites, with proportions ranging from 0.57ˆ1.81%. In all cases, transitions accounted for more than 70% of nucleotide differences at polymorphic sites. Polymorphic sites were split nearly evenly in the SSU rRNA molecule between the base-paired regions of helices (52%) and the unpaired regions of loops and bulges (48%). Phylogenetic analysis showed that SSU rDNA genotypes were monophyletic for two of the six culture strains examined. Genotypes from the other four culture strains either showed little or no phylogenetic structure compared to genotypes of other conspecific culture strains, or had phylogenetic structure that was incongruent with existing species boundaries. Moderate to strong support for monophyly was recovered for four of the seven species included in the analysis. Phylogenetic results combined with the low sequence divergence of SSU rDNA genotypes within species suggest that concerted evolution has not proceeded to completion in these species, and/or that the rate at which variation is being generated exceeds the rate at which concerted evolution is expunging variation.
S1243	O. de Clerck;B. Gavio;I. Barbara;S. Fredericq;E. Coppejans	2005	Systematics of Grateloupia filicina (Halymeniaceae, Rhodophyta), based on rbcl sequence analyses and morphological evidence, including the reinstatement of G. minima and the description of G. capensis spec. nov	Journal of phycology	41						Grateloupia filicina (C. Agardh) Lamouroux, originally described from the Mediterranean Sea, has long been considered a textbook example of a marine red alga with a cosmopolitan distribution. An rbcL-based molecular phylogeny, encompassing samples covering the entire geographic distribution of the species, reveals a plethora of „cryptic‰ species, whereby the presence of genuine G. filicina is limited to the Mediterranean basin. The phylogeny reveals a strong biogeographic imprint, with specimens from temperate regions resolved in clades composed of species inhabiting the same geographic region. Presence of widely divergent morphologies in the temperate clades indicates that several lineages have converged independently to a G. filicina-type morphology. Tropical representatives are resolved in a single clade with very uniform G. filicina-type morphology and pairwise sequence divergences which are lower than the average divergence observed in temperate lineages. This, combined with a lack of clear geographic structure among the tropical lineages, may indicate a more recent divergence with long range dispersal capacities. Violations to the biogeographic signal in temperate lineages seem to be due to either inadequate taxonomy or to recent introductions. G. minima P. & H. Crouan, a taxon that has been placed in synonymy under G. filicina, is reinstated as a separate species distributed in the northeast Atlantic Ocean. Grateloupia capensis sp. nov. is described to accommodate specimens from South Africa with a G. filicina-type morphology, and G. filicina var. luxurians is elevated to species status. Morphological and anatomical characters are put forward that support the distinctiveness of these three distinct species.
S1282	H. Verbruggen;O. D. Clerck;W. H. C. F. Kooistra;E. Coppejans	2005	Molecular and morphometric data pinpoint species boundaries in Halimeda section Rhipsalis (Bryopsidales, Chlorophyta)	Journal of Phycology	41						Molecular systematic studies have changed the face of algal taxonomy. Particularly at the species level, molecular phylogenetic research has revealed the inaccuracy of morphology-based taxonomy: cryptic and pseudo-cryptic species were shown to exist within many morphologically conceived species. This study focused on section Rhipsalis of the green algal genus Halimeda. This section was known to contain cryptic diversity and to comprise species with overlapping morphological boundaries. In the present study, species diversity within the section and identity of individual specimens were assessed using ITS1ˆ5.8SˆITS2 (nrDNA) and rps3 (cpDNA) sequence data. The sequences grouped in a number of clear-cut genotypic clusters that were considered species. The same specimens were subjected to morphometric analysis of external morphological and anatomical structures. Morphological differences between the genotypic cluster species were assessed using discriminant analyses. It was shown that significant morphological differences exist between genetically delineated species and that allocation of specimens to species on the basis of morphometric variables is nearly perfect. Anatomical characters yielded better results than external morphological characters. Two approaches were offered to allow future morphological identifications: a probabilistic approach based on classification functions of discriminant analyses, and the classical approach of an identification key.
S1523	O. de Clerck;F. Leliaert;H. Verbruggen;C. E. Lane;J. C. D. Paula;D. A. Payo;E. Coppejans	2006	A revised classification of the Dictyoteae (Dictyotales, Phaeophyceae) based on rbcL and 26S ribosomal DNA sequence analyses	Journal of Phycology							Dictyota is a genus of tropical to warm temperate brown algae characterized by parenchymatous, flattened thalli that grow by a single, transversely oriented apical cell. Dictyota is currently distinguished from allied genera of the tribe Dictyoteae (Dilophus, Glossophora, Glossophorella and Pachydictyon) by the structure of the cortical and medullary layers, as well as the relative abundance of surface proliferations. Even though the traditional classification of the Dictyoteae has repeatedly been criticized in the past, the absence of sound molecular data has so far discouraged any new taxonomic proposals apart from a merger of Dilophus with Dictyota which has been accepted by only part of the phycological community. Phylogenetic analysis of rbcL, partial 26S rDNA sequence and combined data sets, including four out of five generitypes, demonstrates that the traditional classification does not accurately reflect its evolutionary history. None of the genera is resolved as a monophyletic clade. Hence, a merger of Glossophora, Glossophorella and Pachydictyon in Dictyota is proposed. Two new genera, Canistrocarpus (incorporating Dictyota cervicornis, D. crispata and D. magneana) and Rugulopteryx (accommodating Dictyota radicans, Dil. suhrii and Dil. marginatus), are described. Both genera are supported by molecular indications and a combination of reproductive and vegetative characters. The position of Dilophus fastigiatus as a clade sister to Dictyota s.l. and the absence of Dil. gunnianus, the generitype of Dilophus, from the analyses, prevented us from making a more definite statement on the status of the latter genus.
S1581	S. Watanabe;K. Mitsui;T. Nakayama;I. Inouye	2006	Phylogenetic relationships and taxonomy of sarcinoid green algae: Chlorosarcinopsis, Desmotetra, Sarcinochlamys gen. nov., Neochlorosarcina, and Chlorosphaeropsis (Chlorophyceae, Chlorophyta)	Journal of Phycology	42		679-695				We investigated phylogenetic relationships and taxonomy of 20 sarcinoid strains by their morphological features and using 18S rDNA sequence data. Nineteen strains of Chlorosarcinopsis (Gerneck) Herndon and allied genera were divided into four groups (A-D). Group A comprising eight species was concordant with the description of Chlorosarcinopsis and divided into four polyphyletic subgroups. Group B included two species of Chlorosarcinopsis and two strains of Desmotetra stigmatica (Deason) Deason et Floyd, all of which had parallel thylakoid membranes in pyrenoid matrices, and zoospores bearing apical stigma and subapical flagellar apparatus. The definition of Desmotetra Deason et Floyd was emended to include these features, and Chlorosarcinopsis delicata S. Watanabe was transferred to this genus. Group C comprised Chlorosarcina stigmatica Deason (ASIB.T105), for which we proposed Sarcinochlamys gen. nov., a genus distinct from Chlorosarcina Gerneck in having walled zoospores. Group D comprising six species corresponded to Neochlorosarcina and was divided into two subgroups. The presence of thin cell walls in Neochlorosarcina S. Watanabe was ascertained as a valid feature for circumscribing the sarcinoid genera. The physiological experiments on the species of Chlorosarcinopsis and Chlorosarcina by Groover and Bold (1968) were assessed based on the phylogenetic results. Groups (A, B, D) were roughly characterized by these features: plant mass color, utilization of selected nitrogen compounds and carbon sources under light/dark and aerobic/anaerobic conditions, and requirement for vitamin B12. Molecular analysis revealed that Chlorosphaeropsis alveolata Herndon had closer affinity with solitary Protosiphon Klebs and Spongiochloris Starr than with sarcinoid members.
S1828	I. Ciugulea;M. A. Nudelman;S. Brosnan;R. E. Triemer	2008	Phylogeny of the Euglenoid Loricate Genera Trachelomonas and Strombomonas (Euglenophyta) Inferred from Nuclear SSU and LSU rDNA	Journal of Phycology	44	2	406-418	10.1111/j.1529-8817.2008.00472.x			Previous studies using the nuclear SSU rDNA and partial LSU rDNA have demonstrated that the euglenoid loricate taxa form a monophyletic clade within the photosynthetic euglenoid lineage. It was unclear, however, whether the loricate genera Trachelomonas and Strombomonas were monophyletic. In order to determine the relationships among the loricate taxa, SSU and LSU nuclear rDNA sequences were obtained for eight Strombomonas and twenty-five Trachelomonas strains and combined in a multigene phylogenetic analysis. Conserved regions of the aligned dataset were used to generate maximum-likelihood and Bayesian phylogenies. Both methods recovered a strongly supported monophyletic loricate clade with Strombomonas and Trachelomonas species separated into two sister clades. Taxa in the genus Strombomonas sorted into three subclades. Within the genus Trachelomonas, five strongly supported subclades were recovered in all analyses. Key morphological features could be attributed to each of the subclades, with the major separation being that all of the spine-bearing taxa were located in two sister subclades while the more rounded, spineless taxa formed the remaining three clades. The separation of genera and subclades were supported by 42 distinct molecular signatures (33 in Trachelomonas and 9 in Strombomonas). The morphological and molecular data supported the retention of Trachelomonas and Strombomonas as separate loricate genera. Keywords: Euglenophyta; loricates; LSU rDNA; molecular markers; phylogeny; SSU rDNA; Strombomonas; Trachelomonas
S2216	H. Verbruggen;C. Vlaeminck;T. Sauvage;A. R. Sherwood;F. Leliaert;O. D. Clerck	2008	Phylogenetic analysis of Pseudochlorodesmis strains reveals cryptic diversity above the family level in the siphonous green algae (Bryopsidales, Chlorophyta)	Journal of Phycology							The genus Pseudochlorodesmis (Bryopsidales) is comprised of diminutive siphons of extreme morphological simplicity. The discovery of Pseudochlorodesmis-like juveniles in more complex Bryopsidales (e.g. the Halimeda microthallus stage) jeopardized the recognition of this genus. Confronted with this uncertainty, taxonomists transferred many simple siphons into a new genus, Siphonogramen. In this paper, we used a multi-marker approach to clarify the phylogenetic and taxonomic affinities of the Pseudochlorodesmis-Siphonogramen (PS) complex within the more morphologically complex bryopsidalean taxa. Our analyses reveal a new layer of diversity largely distinct from the lineages containing the structurally complex genera. The PS complex shows profound cryptic diversity exceeding the family level, which is likely to increase with future collections. We discuss a potential link between thallus complexity and the prevalence and profundity of cryptic diversity. For taxonomic simplicity and as a first step toward clarifying the taxonomy of these simple siphons, we propose to maintain Pseudochlorodesmis as a form genus and subsume Siphonogramen and Botryodesmis therein.
S2260	C. E. Payri;H. Verbruggen	2009	Pseudocodium mucronatum, a new species from New Caledonia, and an analysis of the evolution of climatic preferences in the genus (Bryopsidales, Chlorophyta)	Journal of Phycology							A new species, Pseudocodium mucronatum, is described from the Chesterfield platform off the West coast of New Caledonia. The species differs from its congeners in having mucronate utricules. A phylogenetic analysis of rbcL and tufA sequences show that P. mucronatum is most closely associated with P. natalense and P. devriesii, with which it shares compressed axes, depressed apices and plastids in the utricles and the medullar siphons. We study the evolution of climatic and ecological preferences in the genus using an interdisciplinary approach consisting of relaxed molecular clock analysis, extraction of macroecological data from satellite imagery in a GIS framework and ancestral character state estimation. It is shown that the genus originated in tropical waters during the Early Mesozoic. Whereas the P. floridanum-okinawense lineage remained tropical, the lineage including P. natalense, P. devriesii and P. mucronatum gradually invaded more temperate waters during Cenozoic times. Except for P. devriesii, which occurs in shallow and intertidal habitats, all Pseudocodium species grow in deep-water habitats and this ecological preference appears to be ancestral.
S2386	M. R. Letsch;G. Muller-Parker;T. Friedl;L. A. Lewis	2009	Elliptochloris marina n. sp. (Trebouxiophyceae, Chlorophyta), Symbiotic Green Alga of the Temperate Pacific Sea Anemones Anthopleura xanthogrammica and A. elegantissima (Anthozoa, Cnidaria)	Journal of Phycology	45	5	1127-1135	10.1111/j.1529-8817.2009.00727.x			Symbiotic green algae from two species of Pacific sea anemones, Anthopleura elegantissima Brandt, and Anthopleura xanthogrammica Brandt, were collected across their known range from the northeastern Pacific coast of North America. Freshly isolated Anthopleura symbionts were used for both morphological and molecular techniques because Anthopleura symbiont cultures were not available. Light and transmission electron microscopy supported previous morphological studies, showing the symbionts consist of spherical unicells from 5-10 µm in diameter, with numerous vesicles, and a single bilobed chloroplast. Pyrenoids were not observed in light microscopy but a thylakoid free area was observed in transmission electron microscopy, consistent with previous findings. Many cells extracted from fresh anemone tissue were observed in the process of division, producing two autospores within a maternal cell wall. The morphology of the green symbionts matches that of Elliptochloris Tschermak-Woess. Molecular phylogenetic analyses of data from the nuclear SSU rDNA, and the plastid encoded gene for the large subunit of RUBISCO (rbcL) support the monophyly of these green algal symbionts, regardless of their host species or geographic origin. Phylogenetically, sequences of the Anthopleura symbionts were nested within the genus Elliptochloris but distinct from sequences of all other Elliptochloris spp. examined. Given the ecological and phylogenetic distinctions among the green symbionts taken from Anthopleura and the named species of Elliptochloris, we designate the green anemone symbionts as a new species, Elliptochloris marina (Trebouxiophyceae, Chlorophyta).
S2397	H. Nozaki;T. Nakada;S. Watanabe	2010	Evolutionary origin of Gloeomonas (Volvocales, Chlorophyceae), based on ultrastructure of chloroplasts and molecular phylogeny	Journal of Phycology	46	1	195-201	10.1111/j.1529-8817.2009.00773.x			Gloeomonas is a peculiar unicellular volvocalean genus because it lacks pyrenoids in the chloroplasts under the light microscope and has two flagellar bases that are remote from each other. However, ultrastructural features of chloroplasts are very limited and no molecular phylogenetic analyses have been carried out in Gloeomonas. In this study we observed ultrastructural features of chloroplasts of three species of Gloeomonas and Chloromonas rubrifilum SAG 3.85, and phylogenetic analyses were carried based on the combined data set from 18S ribosomal RNA, ATP synthase beta subunit and P700 chlorophyll a apoprotein A2 gene sequences, in order to deduce the natural phylogenetic positions of the genus Gloeomonas. The present electron microscopy demonstrated that the chloroplasts of the three Gloeomonas species and C. rubrifilum SAG 3.85 do not have typical pyrenoids with associated starch grains, but they possessed pyrenoid matrices that protruded interiorly within the stroma regions of the chloroplast. The pyrenoid matrices were large and broad in C. rubrifilum whereas those of the three Gloeomonas species were recognized in only the small protruded regions of the chloroplast lobes. The present multigene phylogenetic analyses resolved that the three species of Gloeomonas belong to the Chloromonas lineage or Chloromonadinia of the Volvocales, and Chloromonas insignis NIES 446 and C. rubrifilum SAG 3.85, both of which have pyrenoids without associated starch grains, were positioned basally to the clade composed of the three species of Gloeomonas. Therefore, Gloeomonas might have evolved from such a Chloromonas species through reduction in pyrenoid matrix size within the chloroplast and by separating their two flagellar bases.
S2396	A. A. Gontcharov;M. Melkonian	2010	Molecular phylogeny and revision of the genus Netrium (Zygnematophyceae, Streptophyta): Planotaenium stat. nov. and Nucleotaenium gen. nov	Journal of Phycology	46	2	346-362	10.1111/j.1529-8817.2010.00814.x			Nuclear-encoded SSU rDNA, chloroplast LSU rDNA and rbcL genes were sequenced from 53 strains of conjugating green algae (Zygnematophyceae, Streptophyta) and used to analyse phylogenetic relationships in the traditional order Zygnematales. Analyses of a concatenated data set (5220 nt) established 13 well-supported clades in the order, seven of these constituted a superclade termed Zygnemataceae clade. Together with genera (Zygnema, Mougeotia), traditionally placed in the family Zygnemataceae, the Zygnemataceae clade also included representatives of the genera Cylindrocystis and Mesotaenium traditionally placed in the family Mesotaeniaceae. A synapomorphic amino acid replacement (codon 192, cysteine replaced by valine) in the large subunit of RuBisCo characterised this superclade. The traditional genera Netrium, Cylindrocystis and Mesotaenium were shown to be para- or polyphyletic highlighting the inadequacy of phenotypic traits used to define these genera. Species of the traditional genus Netrium were resolved as three well-supported clades each distinct in the number of chloroplasts per cell, their surface morphology (structure and arrangement of lamellae) and the position of the nucleus or nuclear behaviour during cell division. Based on molecular phylogenetic analyses and synapomorphic phenotypic traits, the genus Netrium has been revised and two new genera, Planotaenium. stat. nov. and Nucleotaenium gen. nov., were established. Planotaenium was identified as the sister group of the derived Roya/Desmidiales clade and thus occupies a key position in the evolutionary radiation leading to the most species-rich group of streptophyte green algae.
S2526	T. L. Weiss;J. S. Johnston;K. Fujisawa;K. Sumimoto;S. Okada;J. Chappell;T. P. Devarenne	2010	Phylogenetic Placement, Genome Size, and GC-Content of the Liquid Hydrocarbon Producing Green Microalga Botryococcus Braunii var. Berkeley (Showa) (Chlorophyta)	Journal of Phycology	46	3	534-540	10.1111/j.1529-8817.2010.00820.x			We report the genome size, the GC content and perform a phylogenetic analysis on Botryococcus braunii, Kützing, a green, colony forming, hydrocarbon-rich alga that is an attractive source for biopetroleum. While the chemistry of the hydrocarbons produced by the B race of B. braunii has been studied for many years, there is a deficiency of information concerning the molecular biology of this alga. Additionally, there has been some discrepancy as to the phylogenetic placement of the Berkeley (or Showa) strain of the B race. In order to clarify its classification, we isolated the Berkeley strain nuclear small subunit (18S) rRNA gene and beta-actin cDNA and used these sequences for phylogenetic analysis to determine that the Berkeley strain belongs to the Trebouxiophyceae class. This is in agreement with other B races of B. braunii, indicating the Berkeley strain is a true B race of B. braunii. In order to better understand molecular aspects of B. braunii, we obtained the Berkeley strain genome size as a first step in genome sequencing. Using flow cytometry, we determined the B. braunii, Berkeley genome size to be 166.2 +/- 2.2 Mb. We also estimated the GC-content of the Berkeley strain as 54.4 +/- 1.2% for expressed gene sequences.
S2000	A. G. Saez;A. Zaldivar-Riveron;L. K. Medlin	2008	Molecular systematics of the Pleurochrysidaceae, a family of coastal coccolithophores (Haptophyta)	Journal of Plankton Research							Within the marine phytoplankton community, coccolithophores are important players in the carbon cycle, because of their great abundance and unusual ability to form an external cover of calcium carbonate. Most described species are oceanic, and so little attention has been devoted to coastal species, the majority of which belong to two families: Pleurochrysidaceae and Hymenomonadaceae. Here, we study the biodiversity and evolutionary relationships within the Pleurochrysidaceae, for which we have compiled DNA sequences from a total of 18 strains plus three members of the Hymenomonadaceae. Most of the analysed sequences have been obtained for this study and belong to three genetic fragments: 18S rDNA, elongation factor Tu (tufA), and internal transcribed spacers 1 and 2, which include the 5.8S rDNA. We find some discordance between the current taxonomy of the group and our molecular analyses. First, we observe that several different recognised species are in fact highly similar taxa, probably belonging to the same evolutionary lineages. Secondly, we show some unexpected phylogenetic relationships. In the light of these results, we suggest that, when possible, DNA sequences be considered in future taxonomic classifications of the Pleurochrysidaceae and other planktonic organisms.
S2059	J. M. Park;J. F. Manen;A. E. Colwell;G. M. Schneeweiss	2008	A plastid gene phylogeny of the non-photosynthetic parasitic Orobanche (Orobanchaceae) and related genera	Journal of Plant Research							Phylogenetic relationships of the non-photosynthetic Orobanche sensu lato (Orobanchaceae), which includes some of the economically most important parasitic weeds, are still insufficiently understood and controversial. This concerns both the phylogenetic relationships within the genus, in particular its monophyly or the lack thereof, and the relationships to other holoparasitic genera such as Cistanche or Conopholis. Here we present the first comprehensive phylogenetic study of this group based on a region from the plastid genome (rps2 gene). Although substitution rates appear to be elevated compared to the photosynthetic members of Orobanchaceae, relationships among the major lineages Cistanche, Conopholis plus Epifagus, Boschniakia rossica (Cham. & Schltdl.) B. Fedtsch., B. himalaica Hook. f. & Thomson, B. hookeri Walp. plus B. strobilacea A. Gray, and Orobanche s. l. remain unresolved. Resolution within Orobanche, however, is much better. In agreement with morphological, cytological and other molecular phylogenetic evidence five lineages, corresponding to the four traditionally recognised sections (Gymnocaulis, Myzorrhiza, Orobanche, Trionychon) and O. latisquama Reut. ex Boiss. (of sect. Orobanche), can be distinguished. A combined analysis of plastid rps2 and nuclear ITS sequences of the holoparasitic genera results in more resolved and better supported trees, although the relationships among Orobanche s. l., Cistanche, and the clade including the remaining genera is unresolved. Therefore, rps2 is a well-suited marker from the plastid genome to be used in combination with other already established nuclear markers for resolving generic relationships of Orobanche and related genera.
S1905	H. Wiklund;A. Nygren;F. Pleijel;P. Sundberg	2007	The phylogenetic relationships between Amphinomidae, Archinomidae and Euphrosinidae (Amphinomida, Aciculata, Polychaeta) inferred from molecular data	Journal of the Marine Biological Association of the United Kingdom	88		509-513	10.1017/s0025315408000982			Amphinomida is an „isolated‰ clade within the polychaete group Aciculata and it traditionally includes the families Amphinomidae, Archinomidae and Euphrosinidae. Archinomidae was erected for a single species, the hydrothermal vent polychaete Archinome rosacea. Originally, A. rosacea was assigned to Euphrosinidae although it shares more morphological similarities with Amphinomidae. In this study we assess the position of Archinome, Euphrosinidae and Amphinomidae by using molecular data from nuclear 18S rDNA and 28S rDNA. Parsimony and Bayesian analyses are performed on the nucleotide datasets covering in total 19 terminal taxa from Amphinomidae, Euphrosinidae, Archinomidae and outgroups. Our results conclusively show that Euphrosinidae and Amphinomidae are sister taxa, that Archinome has a sister group within Amphinomidae and, accordingly, that the family name Archinomidae is a junior synonym of Amphinomidae.
S2066	P. Cartwright;N. M. Evans;C. W. Dunn;A. C. Marques;M. P. Miglietta;A. G. Collins	2008	Phylogenetics of Hydroidolina (Cnidaria, Hydrozoa)	Journal of the Marine Biological Association of the United Kingdom							Hydroidolina is a group of hydrozoans that includes Anthoathecata, Leptothecata and Siphonophorae. Previous phylogenetic analyses show strong support for Hydroidolina monophyly, but the relationships between and within its subgroups remain uncertain. In an effort to further clarify hydroidolinan relationships, we performed phylogenetic analyses on 97 hydroidolinan taxa, using DNA sequences from partial mitochondrial 16S rDNA, nearly complete nuclear 18S rDNA and nearly complete nuclear 28S rDNA. Our findings are consistent with previous analyses that support monophyly of Siphonophorae and Leptothecata and do not support monophyly of Anthoathecata nor its component subgroups, Filifera and Capitata. Instead, within Anthoathecata, we find support for four separate filiferan clades and two separate capitate clades (Aplanulata and Capitata sensu stricto). Our data however, lack any substantive support for discerning relationships between these eight distinct hydroidolinan clades.
S718	M. Kearney	2003	The phylogenetic position of Sineoamphisbaena hexatabularis reexamined	Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology	23	2	394-403	10.1671/0272-4634(2003)023[0394:tpposh]2.0.co;2			Sineoamphisbaena hexatabularis, a fossil squamate recovered from Upper Cretaceous deposits in Inner Mongolia, China, was reported to be the oldest known amphisbaenian and the sister group to all other amphisbaenians. However, the conclusion of amphisbaenian affinities was based on a partitioned analysis that excluded relevant data and included reconstructed characters. When characters for analysis are limited to those that are observable on the fossils and all evidence is included and analyzed simultaneously, results do not support S. hexatabularis as an amphisbaenian, but instead suggest that S. hexatabularis may be related to macrocephalosaurids. Several potential synapomorphies of S. hexatabularis and macrocephalosaurids are provided, including: presence of lateral process of palatal ramus of pterygoid; postorbital large and extending posteriorly beyond supratemporal fenestra approaching posterior edge of cranial roof; and tall, narrow, dorsal process of maxilla. S. hexatabularis is tentatively reassigned to the Macrocephalosauridae. The origin of amphisbaenians remains obscure.
S1189	G. Vallin;M. Laurin	2004	Cranial morphology and affinities of Microbrachis, and a reappraisal of the phylogeny and lifestyle of the first amphibians	Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology	24		56-72				An anatomical study of Microbrachis reveals inaccuracies in previous studies, especially in the palate and cranial proportions. The vomer and the pterygoid reach the midline anteriorly, and the postorbital does not appear to reach the tabular. The skull is higher in our cranial reconstruction than previously thought. A phylogenetic analysis of early stegocephalians places Microbrachis at a fairly basal position in the clade that includes ŒŒmicrosaurs,‚‚ lysorophians, and lissamphibians. This analysis corroborates previous suggestions that lissamphibians are part of a clade that includes the taxa classically referred to as ŒŒlepospondyls,‚‚ and that seymouriamorphs and temnospondyls are not part of Tetrapoda. Statistical tests on another recent amphibian phylogeny reveal that its different placement of the origin of lissamphibians is not statistically more parsimonious than the placement that we suggest. Our analysis also suggests that the first evolutionary radiation of amphibians took place in an aquatic environment because most of the first groups of amphibians to have differentiated, namely adelogyrinids, nectrideans, and Microbrachis, appear to have been aquatic or amphibious taxa. However, the lifestyle of many early amphibians is difficult to assess.
S2179	G. Nolasco;C. Santos;G. Silva;F. Fonseca	2008	Development of an asymmetric PCR ELISA typing assay for citrus tristeza virus based on the coat protein gene	Journal of Virological Methods							The coat protein gene of isolates of citrus tristeza virus (CTV) from twenty citrus-producing regions around the world was amplified by RT-PCR, TA cloned, and characterized by SSCP. Haplotypes that produced different patterns within each geographic region were sequenced and a database of 153 accessions of CTV was assembled. Phylogenetic analysis revealed the existence of seven well-defined clusters (Coefficient of differentiation 0.78). An asymmetric PCR ELISA typing (APET) assay was developed in the frame of this clustering pattern using a set of eight hybridization probes. The membership of any unknown haplotype is determined by comparing its pattern of reaction against the whole set of probes and not, as previously done in hybridization assays, in an all-or-nothing basis. Interpretation of the results is objective and done through a visual basic application that compares the rates of hydrolysis of the ELISA substrate of an assayed isolate to a matrix of rates of hydrolysis obtained from standard haplotypes. This assay was validated and showed a better ability to resolve haplotypes than other assays to which it was experimentally compared. It may be automated to the same extent as any ELISA assay.
S625	E. A. Herniou;T. Luque;X. Chen;J. M. Vlak;D. Winstanley;J. S. Cory;D. R. O'Reilly	2001	Use of whole genome sequence data to infer baculovirus phylogeny	Journal of Virology	75	17	8117-8126	10.1128/JVI.75.17.8117-8126.2001			Several phylogenetic methods based on whole genome sequence data were evaluated using data from nine complete baculovirus genomes. The utility of three independent character sets was assessed. The first data set comprised the sequences of the 63 genes common to these viruses. The second set of characters was based on gene order, and phylogenies were inferred using both breakpoint distance analysis and a novel method developed here, termed neighbor pair analysis. The third set recorded gene content by scoring gene presence or absence in each genome. All three data sets yielded phylogenies supporting the separation of the Nucleopolyhedrovirus (NPV) and Granulovirus (GV) genera, the division of the NPVs into groups I and II, and species relationships within group I NPVs. Generation of phylogenies based on the combined sequences of all 63 shared genes proved to be the most effective approach to resolving the relationships among the group II NPVs and the GVs. The history of gene acquisitions and losses that have accompanied baculovirus diversification was visualized by mapping the gene content data onto the phylogenetic tree. This analysis highlighted the fluid nature of baculovirus genomes, with evidence of frequent genome rearrangements and multiple gene content changes during their evolution. Of more than 416 genes identified in the genomes analyzed, only 63 are present in all nine genomes, and 200 genes are found only in a single genome. Despite this fluidity, the whole genome-based methods we describe are sufficiently powerful to recover the underlying phylogeny of the viruses. 
S1005	E. A. Herniou;J. A. Olszewski;D. R. O'Reilly;J. S. Cory	2004	Ancient coevolution of baculoviruses and their insect hosts	Journal of Virology	78	7	3244-3251				If the relationships between baculoviruses and their insect hosts are subject to coevolution, this should lead to long-term evolutionary effects such as the specialisation of these pathogens for their hosts. To test this hypothesis, a phylogeny of the Baculoviridae, including 39 viruses from hosts of the orders Lepidoptera, Diptera and Hymenoptera, was reconstructed based on sequences from the genes lef-8 and ac22. The tree showed a clear division of the baculoviruses according to the order of their hosts. This division highlighted the need to reconsider the classification of the baculoviruses to include one or possibly two new genera. Furthermore, the specialisation of distinct virus lineages to particular insect orders suggests ancient coevolutionary interactions between baculoviruses and their hosts.
S1401	I. Ribera;J. Mateu;X. Bellés	2005	Phylogenetic relationships of Dalyat mirabilis Mateu, 2002, with a revised molecular phylogeny of ground beetles (Coleoptera, Carabidae)	Journal of Zoological Systematics and Evolutionary Research	43	4	284-296				Dalyat mirabilis Mateu 2002 (Coleoptera: Carabidae) is a cave species recently described from SE Spain, which, based on a morphological analyses, has been related to the Promecognathinae (with one genus in western North America and four genera in South Africa). In this paper, we investigated the phylogenetic relationships of the main lineages of family Carabidae, and the placement of Dalyat among them, with the 18S rRNA full sequence and a fragment of wingless with the use of parsimony, a fast maximum likelihood algorithm (implemented in the program phyml), and Bayesian posterior probabilities. Although with wingless alone the relationships of Dalyat were not robustly supported, both with 18S rRNA and in a combined analysis there was a strong support for a sister relationship between Promecognathus and Dalyat with the three methods used. Using a molecular-clock approach the two lineages were estimated to have diverged at a similar (or slightly earlier) age than the origin of Harpalinae, known to have radiated in the Cretaceous. This is compatible with a vicariant origin of the lineage leading to Dalyat because of the isolation of the Iberian plate from Pangea in the late Jurassic to early Cretaceous. Other robust relationships within the Carabidae are the monophyly of Harpalinae (including Morionini, Peleciini and Pseudomorphini), its sister relationship with Brachininae, and the inclusion of these two subfamilies together with Scaritini and the austral Psydrinae in a strongly supported clade (the higher Carabidae).
S1035	M. Cardillo;O. R. P. Bininda-Emonds;E. Boakes;A. Purvis	2004	A species-level phylogenetic supertree of marsupials	Journal of Zoology	264	1	11-31	10.1017/s0952836904005539			Comparative studies require information on phylogenetic relationships, but complete species-level phylogenetic trees of large clades are difficult to produce. One solution is to combine algorithmically many small trees into a single, larger supertree. Here we present a virtually complete, species-level phylogeny of the marsupials (Mammalia: Metatheria), built by combining 158 phylogenetic estimates published since 1980, using Matrix Representation with Parsimony. The supertree is well resolved overall (73.7%), although resolution varies across the tree, indicating variation both in the amount of phylogenetic information available for different taxa, and the degree of conflict among phylogenetic estimates. In particular, the supertree shows poor resolution within the American marsupial taxa, reflecting a relative lack of systematic effort compared to the Australasian taxa. There are also important differences in supertrees based on source phylogenies published before 1995 and those published more recently. The supertree can be viewed as a meta-analysis of marsupial phylogenetic studies, and should be useful as a framework for phylogenetically explicit comparative studies of marsupial evolution and ecology.
S1312	W. T. Stanley;L. E. Olson	2005	Phylogeny, phylogeography, and geographic variation of Sylvisorex howelli (Family Soricidae), an endemic shrew of the Eastern Arc Mountains, Tanzania	Journal of Zoology							The Eastern Arc Mountains of eastern Africa are notable for the high levels of endemism exhibited by various forest-dwelling organisms of this ancient montane archipelago. There has been virtually no assessment of the variation among populations of small mammal species living on these unique mountains, but recent faunal surveys have produced sufficient material to initiate such studies. We examined cranial morphometric and DNA sequence data from six populations of Sylvisorex howelli (Jenkins, 1984), an endemic shrew found in several different massifs of the Eastern Arc Mountains, in order to assess variation across the archipelago in the context of various hypotheses of historical biogeography. We analyzed 22 cranial measurements using principal components analysis. Age classes (based on tooth wear) and sex had little effect on the variation exhibited by the variables studied. Overall, specimens of S. howelli from the East Usambara Mountains are smaller in size than specimens from other known populations. We sequenced the mitochondrial ND2 and 12S rRNA genes from representatives of each montane population of S. howelli in addition to several crocidurine taxa from eastern Africa and three soricine outgroup species to assess phylogenetic relationships among these taxa. Neither maximum likelihood, maximum parsimony, nor Bayesian analyses support monophyly of the genus Sylvisorex, but S. howelli populations were consistently recovered as a well-supported clade. Over 40 individuals of S. howelli from six disjunct montane ranges, comprising the species' entire known distribution, were sequenced for 504 base pairs of ND2 to investigate phylogeographic patterns. Phylogenetic analysis recovered six reciprocally monophyletic haplotype clades grouped by locality. Branch lengths are consistent with relatively long periods of isolation among populations from the Uluguru, Ukaguru, Nguru, Nguu, East Usambara and West Usambara Mountains, with low levels of diversity observed within each population. These results are interpreted within the historical context of the Eastern Arc Mountains.
S1435	S. M. Goodman;C. J. Raxworthy;C. P. Maminirina;L. E. Olson	2006	A new species of shrew tenrec (Microgale jobihely) from northern Madagascar	Journal of Zoology							A new species of shrew tenrec in the genus Microgale is described from a series of 12 specimens taken on the southwestern slopes of the Tsaratanana Massif in northern Madagascar and is named M. jobihely. This new species is distinguished from other named members of this endemic genus by a variety of mensural and discrete morphological characters. Phylogenetic analysis of the mitochondrial ND2 gene supports its recognition as a distinct species and suggests a sister relationship with the much more widespread M. cowani. Microgale jobihely appears to be the only member of this genus to be a very localized endemic and a biogeographic scenario is presented to explain this observation. It is currently known from a small area of forest, outside of the protected areas system, that is faced with considerable anthropogenic pressure.
S1866	R. L. Mueller;T. R. Gregory;S. M. Gregory;A. Hsieh;J. L. Boore	2007	Genome size, cell size, and the evolution of enucleated erythrocytes in attenuate salamanders	Journal of Zoology							Within the salamander family Plethodontidae, five different clades have evolved high levels of enucleated red blood cells, which are extremely unusual among non-mammalian vertebrates. In each of these five clades, the salamanders have large genomes and miniaturized or attenuated body forms. Such a correlation suggests that the loss of nuclei in red blood cells may be related, in part, to the interaction between large genome size and small body size, which has been shown to have profound morphological consequences for the nervous and visual systems in plethodontids. Previous work has demonstrated that variation in both the level of enucleated cells and the size of the nuclear genome exists among species of the monophyletic plethodontid genus Batrachoseps. Here, we report extensive intraspecific variation in levels of enucleated red blood cells in 15 species and provide measurements of red blood cell size, nucleus size, and genome size for 13 species of Batrachoseps. We present a new phylogenetic hypothesis for the genus based on 6,150 bp of mitochondrial DNA sequence data from nine exemplar taxa and use it to examine the relationship between genome size and enucleated red blood cell morphology in a phylogenetic framework. Our analyses demonstrate positive direct correlations between genome size, nucleus size, and both nucleated and enucleated cell sizes within Batrachoseps, although only the relationship between genome size and nucleus size is significant when phylogenetically independent contrasts are used. In light of our results and broader studies of comparative hematology, we propose that high levels of enucleated, variably sized red blood cells in Batrachoseps may have evolved in response to rheological problems associated with the circulation of large red blood cells containing large, bulky nuclei in an attenuate organism.
S2224	K. Hansen;N. S. Weber;S. Landvik	2008	Phylogenetic relationships and distribution of Karstenella (Pezizomycetes)	Karstenia	48						Phylogenetic analyses of partial SSU and LSU rDNA sequences confirm that Karstenella vernalis is a member of the Pezizales. Substantiating this, we definitively report that the asci of Karstenella are operculate. Karstenella vernalis has been reported only from the type locality in Finland; we expand its known distribution to North America (New Mexico). The inconspicuous ascomata of Karstenella consist of very thin, resupinate apothecia borne on a subiculum. Hypotheses of a close relationship with Pyronema (Pyronemataceae) or other highly reduced apothecial forms are rejected. Combined analyses show that Karstenella constitutes an independent lineage within a highly supported group of the lineages B (Morchellaceae ˆDiscinaceae and Helvellaceae ˆTuberaceae) and C (Ascodesmidaceae, Pyronemataceae, Sarcoscyphaceae and Sarcosomataceae), Caloscyphaceae and Rhizinaceae. This corroborates recognition of a monotypic genus and family of Karstenella. A possible sister group relationship with Caloscyphaceae and/or HelvellaceaeˆTuberaceae is suggested. The ascospores of Karstenella are shown to be bi- to multinucleate using DAPI staining. Excipulum structure and/or spore cytology support a shared origin with Caloscyphaceae and/or the HelvellaceaeˆTuberaceae sub-lineage. Karstenella possesses the most reduced form of ascomata found so far outside lineages A (e.g. Ascobolaceae) and C (e.g. Ascodesmidaceae and Pyronemataceae).
S1651	R. J. Soreng;J. I. Davis;M. A. Voionmaa	2007	A phylogenetic analysis of Poaceae tribe Poeae s.l. based on morphological characters and sequence data from three plastid-encoded genes: evidence for reticulation, and a new classification for the tribe	Kew Bulletin	62	3	425-454				Phylogenetic analysis of nucleotide sequence variation, structural variation in three plastid-encoded genes and variation in 18 morphological characters provide a well-supported hypothesis of relationships within Poaceae supertribe Poodae. Of the ca. 135 genera that are thought to belong to this group, 57 were sampled, representing all of the major groups and most of the minor groups that have been recognised as tribes or subtribes. Historical and modern classifications of Poodae, which includes tribes Aveneae, Hainardieae, Poeae, and other smaller tribes, are reviewed and examined in the light of relationships detected by the phylogenetic analyses. Two major plastid DNA lineages were detected, and they correspond in general to groups traditionally recognised as Aveneae and Poeae, but there is conflict between relationships indicated by the DNA and traditional classifications in ca. one fifth of the genera. Character distributions on the trees reveal substantial differences between homoplasy levels for some morphological characters when placed on morphological versus combined trees. These results suggest possible wide hybrid origins of some groups, especially subtribe Airinae. A substantially revised classification is provided for Poodae, with all previously recognized tribes subsumed within a broadly circumscribed Poeae s.l., in which all accepted genera are accommodated in 21 subtribes. Aveneae and smaller groups that have been recognized as tribes, including Hainardieae, Phalarideae, Phleeae and Seslerieae, are reduced to subtribes. Monophyly of many of the subtribes has at least some molecular support, but others need further study, particularly involving nuclear genes, to better determine their relationships and investigate possible hybrid origins.
S717	D. J. Taylor;C. R. Ishikane;R. A. Haney	2002	The systematics of Holarctic bosminids and a revision that reconciles molecular and morphological evolution	Limnology and Oceanography	47	5	1486-1495		http://www.jstor.org/stable/3068967		Bosminids are ubiquitous and abundant crustacean herbivores in freshwater ecosystems. They are among the best preserved zooplankters in limnological sediments, making them ideal paleolimnological indicators of ecosystem change. Moreover, their egg banks make possible the study of paleogenetics and resurrection ecology. A major limitation to these comparative disciplines is that the relatedness and identities of compared bosminid specimens or subfossils is often uncertain. We aimed to remedy this by developing the first robust molecular phylogeny of the group and inferring patterns of morphological evolution. We used sequence alignments of five nuclear rDNA genes (partial 18S rDNA, internal transcribed spacer 1 [ITS-1], 5.8S, ITS-2, and partial 28S rDNA) and one mitochondrial gene (partial 16S rDNA) from representative Holarctic species from all of the proposed subgenera and genera. No evidence of within-individual sequence variation in the gene regions analyzed was found for the genus Bosmina and the genus Eubosmina. Our nuclear and mitochondrial genetic results revealed a robust phylogeny and were congruent with morphological changes. Competing morphological schemes of bosminid systematics were reconciled by reassigning several species to different subgenera, resurrecting the genus Eubosmina, erecting a new subgenus, and revising the character coding systems that created paraphyletic groups. The results provide an evolutionary framework with diagnostic genetic and morphologic characters for studies of bosminid paleolimnology and paleogenetics.
S2046	A. J. Alverson	2007	Strong purifying selection in the silicon transporters of marine and freshwater diatoms	Limnology and Oceanography	52		1420-1429				Marine and freshwater diatoms show several important differences in silicon physiology. In addition to containing an order of magnitude more silica in their cell walls, freshwater diatoms also appear to have a less efficient silicic acid uptake mechanism. A novel set of silicon transporters (SITs), encoded by a small gene family, import silicic acid from the environment into the diatom cell. Some evidence suggests that the disparity in uptake efficiency between marine and freshwater diatoms might be attributable to different demands on SITs in the two environments. To test this hypothesis, partial SIT genes were cloned and sequenced from 45 species of Thalassiosirales, a diatom lineage with high diversity in marine and freshwaters. Phylogenetically based codon substitution models were used to test whether SITs from marine and freshwater taxa were under similar selective constraints and whether codons in different structural locations of the protein were under similar functional constraints. Purifying selection is the predominant evolutionary force acting on SITs, irrespective of location in the protein, and differences in efficiency of silicic acid uptake between marine and freshwater diatoms are not due to sequence differences in SITs.
S390	G. M. Davis;T. Wilke;C. Spolsky;C. P. Qiu;D. C. Qui;M. Y. Xia;Y. Zhang;G. Rosenberg	1998	Cytochrome oxidase I-based phylogenetic relationships among the Pomatiopsidae, Hydrobiidae, Rissoidae and Truncatellidae (Gastropoda: Caenogastropoda: Rissoacea)	Malacologia	40	1-21	251-266				The Gondwanian-derived Asian pomatiopsid radiation is taxonomically complex, diversity-rich, and widely deployed geographically. This Asian branch of the family has coevolved with such human trematode parasites as Schistosoma and Paragonimus; it is ideally suitable for studying patterns and processes of evolution over 100 million years. Cytochrome c oxidase subunit I gene sequences are used here to elucidate taxonomic relationships from the subspecies to familial level. In Chinese literature, pomatiopsid taxa have been classified in the Hydrobiidae; what are the genetic relationships between Hydrobia and allied taxa classified as pomatiopsid? Sixteen sequences, ranging in length from 578 to 645 nucleotides, are aligned from 11 species of nine genera assigned to seven families, four of which are rissoacean. Five different phylogenetic analyses are concordant: (1) the pomatiopsid taxa are in one distinct clade, the other rissoaceans form a second ciade; (2) truncatellids are more closely allied to the hydrobiids than to the pomatiopsids; (3) the rissoid Setia is part of the truncatellid-hydrobiid clade; (4) two subspecies of Oncomelania are clearly divergent; (5) triculine taxa appear divergent from pomatiopsine taxa. However, the Tricula sp. node is weakly supported. Individuals of a population differ by an average of 0.005 +- 0.004 nucleotide differences/site; the subspecies of Oncomelania differ by 0.148 +- 0.004; the two species of Hydrobia differ by 0.162 (range of 0.161 - 0.163); the triculine genera Tricula and Gammatricula differ by 0.132 (range of 0.130 - 0.133); the pomatiopsid subfamilies Pomatiopsinae and Triculinae differ by 0.179 +- 0.020; the families Hydrobiidae and Pomatiopsidae differ by 0.267 +- 0.016. Non-rissoacean and rissoacean taxa differ by 0.274 +- 0.023.
S1965	J. J. Sato;A. Shinohara;N. Miyashita;C. Koshimoto;K. Tsuchiya;I. Nakahara;T. Morita;H. Yonekawa;K. Moriwaki;Y. Yamaguchi	2007	Discovery of a new HBB haplotype w2 in a wild-derived house mouse, Mus musculus	Mammalian Genome							Genetic characterization of a wild-derived house mouse, Mus musculus, originally collected near Lake Balkhash in the Republic of Kazakhstan, was performed by examining protein polymorphisms and nucleotide sequences for the hemoglobin beta chain (HBB) subunits. Protein electrophoresis, which was performed on a cellulose-acetate plate, showed an independent mobility pattern representing a new, previously undiscovered haplotype. Neighbor-joining analyses of the HBB adult genes, i.e., HBB-T1 and HBB-T2, and the intergenic spacer region showed that the Lake Balkhash mouse possessed genomic components that were mixed from different haplotypes. Compared to the previously determined HBB haplotypes, d, p, and w1, the HBB-T1 gene and ca. 11 kb of the spacer region were most similar to the w1 haplotype; however, the remainder of the spacer region and the HBB-T2 gene were most similar to the d haplotype but may represent a still uncharacterized and divergent haplotype. The recombination event is predicted to have occurred 2.5 kb upstream of the HBB-T2 gene, and may have occurred through intersubspecific hybridization between mice of the musculus subspecies group (with the w1 haplotype) and the castaneus subspecies group (with the d-like haplotype). Alternatively, unknown subspecies group that is equidistantly divergent from each of these subspecies groups may have been involved. Our findings suggest reticulate evolution among the subspecies groups during the evolution of M. musculus.
S833	J. A. Sánchez;C. S. McFadden;S. C. France;H. R. Lasker	2003	Molecular Phylogenetic analyses of shallow-water Caribbean octocorals	Marine Biology	142	5	1432-1793	10.1007/s00227-003-1018-7		Gorgonian; Cnidaria; ND2; ND6; msh1; phylogenetics; sclerites; coral reef	Octocorals, especially gorgonians, are conspicuous on Caribbean coral reefs, but there is no consensus regarding species relationships. Mitochondrial protein-coding genes [NADH-dehydrogenase subunits 2 (ND2) and 6 (ND6), and mutS homolog (msh1), 1633 bp] from 28 shallow-water species were sequenced to develop the first molecular phylogeny for Caribbean octocorals. The specimens were collected primarily in the Caribbean or off Brazil in 1999-2001. Morphological characters (sclerites and axial ultrastructure) were also examined in order to map them onto the molecular phylogeny. Analyses of both nucleotide and amino acid substitutions using maximum parsimony and likelihood (including maximum-likelihood and Bayesian analysis) generated very similar results, with most nodes having high levels of support. These molecular results were significantly different from the generally accepted classification. Neither Plexauridae nor Gorgoniidae were monophyletic. Plexaurella spp., nominal plexaurids, were basal to the gorgoniids, sharing many morphological characters with them. This corroborates previous findings using secondary metabolites and biosynthetic pathways. The sea fans, Gorgonia spp. and Pacifigorgia spp., as well as the pinnate gorgonians, Muriceopsis flavida and Pseudopterogorgia spp., did not have sea fan or pinnate relatives, suggesting there has been convergent evolution of colony form. Caribbean plexaurids appeared more derived and/or recently evolved according to both morphological and molecular data (e.g. Eunicea spp. and Plexaura spp.). Molecular phylogenetics is a promising approach for reconstructing phylogenetic relationships among octocorals as well as to understand their complex morphology.
S1125	X. Pochon;T. C. LaJeunesse;J. Pawlowski	2004	Biogeographic partitioning and host specialization among foraminiferan dinoflagellate symbionts (Symbiodinium, Dinophyta)	Marine Biology							Large discoidal soritid foraminiferans (Soritinae) are abundant in coral reef ecosystems. As with the many cnidarian invertebrates that inhabit these systems they also depend on symbiotic dinoflagellates for their growth and survival. Several particular Symbiodinium sub-genera or clades inhabit these soritids. One symbiont lineage, referred to as clade C, dominates corals and their relatives throughout the tropical Indo-Pacific. In contrast, the distribution of Symbiodinium spp. from clades A, B, and C are more evenly apportioned across Caribbean invertebrate communities. To explore the possibility that a similar biogeographic break exists in the symbionts harbored by soritids, we surveyed the Symbiodinium spp. from the soritid genus Sorites collected from the Pacific and Caribbean coasts of Panama as well as from Florida. Characterization of Symbiodinium obtained from foraminiferal and cnidarian samples was conducted using conventional restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) and phylogenetic analyses of the nuclear internal transcribed spacer region 2 (ITS 2) and a portion of the large subunit (LSU) ribosomal DNA sequences. A distinctive biogeographic break between the kinds of symbionts found in Sorites from the East Pacific and Caribbean was clearly evident and probably resulted from environmental pressures believed responsible for the differences in cnidarian symbioses from each ocean. Caribbean Sorites spp. harbored symbionts described from clade F (specifically sub-clade Fr4) and clade H (formally referred to as Fr1), while Sorites spp. from the eastern Pacific were dominated by a single Symbiodinium haplotype in clade C. An ITS 2 phylogeny identified that most clade C types recovered from Indo-Pacific soritids form a monophyletic sub-lineage with other clade C symbionts typically found in Pacific corals from the genus Porites. The existence of multiple Symbiodinium lineages at various taxonomic ranks associating specifically with soritids indicates that symbioses with these hosts are important in driving Symbiodinium spp. evolution.
S1780	N. G. Wilson;R. L. Hunter;S. J. Lockhart;K. M. Halanych	2007	Multiple lineages and absence of panmixia in the Antarctic 'cicumpolar' crinoid Promachocrinus kerguelensis	Marine Biology							Despite considerable interest in physiology, evolution and life history of Antarctic marine invertebrates, only a limited number of studies have examined the genetic variability and diversity patterns of these organisms. Moreover, understanding and characterizing patterns of Antarctic biodiversity has taken on a degree of urgency because of potential impacts of global warming. To expand an understanding of the evolutionary history of Antarctic marine invertebrates, the genetic diversity of the crinoid Promachocrinus kerguelensis Carpenter, 1888 was investigated, which is documented to have a circumpolar distribution extending to subantarctic islands. Specimens of Promachocrinus kerguelensis were collected from the western side of the Antarctic Peninsula, and the subantarctic islands South Georgia, South Sandwich and Bouvetøya Islands from 2001-2004. Promachocrinus kerguelensis was previously subject to morphological review that confirmed the taxonomic recognition of only one species. The wide distribution and reported high dispersal capability for P. kerguelensis predicts one large panmictic population. In contrast, nucleotide sequence data from mitochondrial cytochrome oxidase subunit I and cytochrome b genes, collected herein, reveal distinct genetic structure and cryptic speciation within P. kerguelensis. In the Antarctic Atlantic sector alone, we found at least 5 Œspecies-level‚ clades. Some of these clades are geographically limited, and most exist in sympatry. The largest and most widespread of these clades was examined to help elucidate connectivity along the subantarctic islands of the Scotia Arc and the Antarctic Peninsula. Within this clade, most genetic diversity was contained within populations, but significant differences were present between regions (Antarctic Peninsula, South Sandwich Is., South Georgia, Bouvetøya Is.), suggesting a corresponding lack of gene flow. Given that Promachocrinus Œkerguelensis‚ is a well-studied taxon, the finding of considerable genetic diversity within the Atlantic sector alone suggests that the recognized diversity of Antarctica‚s benthic marine life may be underestimated, and will rise dramatically with phylogeographic analyses of putative widespread species.
S1339	T. H. Struck;G. Purschke;K. M. Halanych	2005	A scaleless scale worm: Molecular evidence for the phylogenetic placement of Pisione remota (Pisionidae, Annelida)	Marine Biology Research	1						Pisionidae is a group of interstitial worms whose phylogentic affinities have been enigmatic. They have been allied to different Phyllodocida taxa. Although originally associated with Glyceridae and Phyllodocidae, they are more recently considered to be related to scale worms. Scale worms are a well-defined taxon, Aphroditiformia, within Annelida due to the unique possession of dorsal scales called elytra. Pisionidae lack elytra but they have been grouped with scale worms because they possess two pairs of jaws with venom glands, also found in Glyceridae. Determining the phylogenetic position of Pisionidae is important for understanding if features such as elytra and venomous jaws are evolutionarily labile in annelid history. Therefore, we explored 18S rDNA and Cytochrome c Oxidase subunit I data from several Aphroditiformia, Pisionidae, and other Phyllodocida to determine the phylogenetic placement of Pisionidae. Maximum likelihood and Bayesian inference of separate and combined data sets were conducted. All analyses support a derived position of Pisionidae within Aphroditiformia, close to Pholoidae and Sigalionidae. The loss of elytra in Pisionidae is probably due to adaptation for interstitial life. Furthermore, the results reject a monophyletic Aphroditoidea comprising Acoetidae, Aphroditidae, Eulepethidae and Polynoidae. Thus, the possession of only simple chaetae is either symplesiomorphic or convergent.
S1232	P. S. Ward	2005	The ant genus Leptanilloides: discovery of the male and evaluation of phylogenetic relationships based on DNA sequence data	Memoirs of the American Entomological Institute							The male of the ant genus Leptanilloides is described for the first time. The description is based on two specimens collected as isolated individuals in sweep samples from montane Costa Rica. Although not associated with ant workers or queens, these males are identified as Leptanilloides mckennae Longino on the basis of DNA sequence similarity to a reference worker of this species from Costa Rica. The male is slightly smaller than the worker, and has most traits expected of the dorylomorph group, including tergosternal fusion of abdominal segments 2 and 3 (but not 4); exposed spiracles on abdominal segments 5 and 6; absence of cerci; and a simplified volsella, lacking a cuspis. Additional attributes include: mandibles elongate-triangular and edentate; anterior clypeal lamella well developed; pronotum triangular in profile and much narrowed anteromedially; mesopleuron lacking posterior oblique sulcus; postpetiole absent; and wing venation reduced (forewing with pterostigma and one submarginal cell, but no discal cell). A molecular phylogenetic analysis, based on 5.1 kb of sequence data from five nuclear genes (18S rDNA, 28S rDNA, wingless, abdominal-A, and LW-rhodopsin), provides strong independent evidence that Leptanilloides is a member of the dorylomorph clade (parsimony bootstrap support of 100%; Bayesian posterior probability of 1.00), although relationships among taxa within that group remain poorly resolved. The dorylomorphs are nested within the formicoid clade, a very well supported group that contains the majority of extant ant subfamilies. Leptanilloides is not closely related to Leptanilla, contrary to some previous ideas. The latter taxon appears well outside the formicoid clade, as sister to all other extant ants sampled in this study (72% parsimony bootstrap, 1.00 posterior probability). The results highlight the repeated evolution of subterranean ants with convergently similar morphology.
S238	V. A. Funk	1982	The systematics of montanoa (Asteraceae, Heliantheae)	Memoirs of the New York Botanical Garden	36		1-132				Montanoa Cerv. (Asteraceae, Heliantheae) includes woody, white-rayed composites with Latin American distributions. Species recognition has always been difficult in the genus because of variation in such features as leaf shape, size and number of involucral bracts and head size. This variation was studied on the individual, inter- and intra-populational levels. Data collected from extensive field and herbarium studies were combined with the results of greenhouse experiments to determine the usefulness of such characters for species determination. Characters with high levels of consistency were used to delimit 25 species (30 taxa) within the genus. These taxa are divided into two subgenera, Montanoa and Acanthocarphae DC. Chromosome counts for 21 of the taxa are presented and revealed three high level polyploids that are all high altitude trees. A cladistic analysis showed extensive parallel evolution in a number of the more conspicuous characters. Basing the hierarchy of Montanoa on the branching pattern produced from the cladistic analysis has resulted in a more natural and predictive classification. Twenty-two of the species recognized are from the over 100 previously described species. There are three new species described here, M. standleyi, M. josei and M. imbricata. Subgenus Montanoa is divided into two sections Montanoa and Echinocephalae sect. nov., with the latter having three series, Frutescentes ser. nov., Amoenae ser. nov. and Apertae ser. nov. Subgenus Acanthocarphae has five series, all described here: Ovalifoliae, Quadrangulares, Hibiscifoliae, Intermediae and Grandiflorae.
S1x29x96c17c22c37	J. W. Grimes	1990	A revision of the New World species of Psoraleeae (Leguminosae: Papilionoideae)	Memoirs of the New York Botanical Garden	61		1-113				A summary of the genera of Psoraleeae is provided, and the New World species are monographed. One new genus, Rupertia, two new subgenera, Pediomelum subgenus Disarticulatum and subgenus Leucocraspedon, and one new species, Otholobium diffidens, are described. The following new combinations are made: Otholobium brachystachyum (Spruce ex Diels) Grimes, O. mexicanum (L. fil.) Grimes, O. holosericeum (Barneby) Grimes, O. higuerilla (Gillies ex Hooker) Grimes, O. munyense (Macbr.) Grimes, O. pubescens (Poir.) Grimes, O. glandulosum (L.) Grimes, Orbexilum pedunculatum (Mill.) Rydb. var gracile (Torr. & A. Gray) Grimes, Rupertia physodes (Douglas ex Hook.) Grimes, R. rigida (Parish) Grimes, R. hallii (Rydb.) Grimes, Pediomelum latestipulatum (Shinn.) Mahler var. appressum (Ock.) Grimes, P. argophyllum (Pursh) Grimes, P. digitatum (Nutt. ex Torr. & A. Gray) Grimes, P. linearfolium (Torr. & A. Gray) Grimes, P. hypogaeum (Nutt. ex Torr. & A. Gray) Rydb. var. scaposum (A. Gray) Grimes, and var. subulatum (Bush) Grimes, P. pentaphyllum (B. Juss ex L.) grimes, and P. palmeri (Ock.) Grimes.
S1425	P. Luis;H. Kellner;B. Zimdars;U. Langer;F. Martin;F. Buscot	2005	Patchiness and Spatial Distribution of Laccase Genes of Ectomycorrhizal, Saprotrophic, and Unknown Basidiomycetes in the Upper Horizons of a Mixed Forest Cambisol	Microbial Ecology	50		570-579				Decomposition of plant litter by the soil microbial community is an important process of controlling nutrient cycling and soil humus formation. Fungal laccases are key players in litter-associated polyphenol degradation, but little is known about the diversity and spatial distribution of fungal species with laccase genes in soils. Diversity of basidiomycete laccase genes was assessed in a podzol and a cambisolic forest soils and the spatial distribution of the sequences was mapped in a 100 m2-plot by using PCR on soil DNA extracts. Diversity of laccase sequences was higher in the brown forest soil (Shannon H, 2.41-2.94) than in the podzol soil (Shannon H, 0.67-1.56), and in the organic horizons of both soils. A total of 167 different sequences was found in 13 soil cores harvested in the 100 m2-plot. Dissimilarity in laccase sequence content was 67% between adjacent cores. Most sequences were attributed to the extramatrical hyphea of known ectomycorrhizal taxa (e.g., Russulaceae) and restricted to small patches (< 0.77 m2) in a specific soil horizon. Soil fungi with laccase genes occupied different niches and showed strikingly variable distribution patterns. The distribution of laccase sequences, and corresponding fungi, likely reflected the oxidative potential in soils.
S502	K. Voigt;J. Wöstemeyer	2000	Reliable amplification of actin genes facilitates deep-level phylogeny	Microbiological Research	155	3	179-195		http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11061186		The gene for actin as a highly conserved and functionally essential genetic element is developing into a major tool for phylogenetic analysis within a broad organismic range. We therefore propose a set of universally applicable primers that allow reliable amplification of actin genes. For primer construction the amino acid sequences of 57 actin genes comprising fungi, animals, plants and protists were analysed, aligned and used for the definition of six well-conserved regions which are suitable as priming sites in PCR amplification experiments. Ten primers were designed for specific in vitro amplification of actin gene fragments from a wide range of microorganisms. The corresponding gene fragments provide a strong basis to isolate nearly complete actin genes for further molecular characterization and for establishing phylogenies based on actin gene trees.
S237	W. L. Fink	1985	Phylogenetic relationships of the stomiid fishes (Teleostei: Stomiiformes)	Miscellaneous Publications of the Museum of Zoology	171		1-127				This paper is the third in a series designed to outline the phylogenetic relationships in the Stomiiformes, a large group of primarily mesopelagic fishes found in all of the world's oceans. The previous works include Weitzman's (1974) revision of the Sternoptychidae and classification of stomiiform subgroups at the family level and above, and Fink and Weitzman's (1982) study of Diplophos and diagnosis of the order. Herein, I consider the relationships of the twenty-six genera of stomiiform fishes known as dragonfishes, viperfishes, snaggletooths, and loosejaws. Traditionally these fishes have been placed in six families, Astronesthidae, Chauliodontidae, Idiacanthidae, Malacosteidae, Melanostomiidae, and Stomiidae, and most recently they were considered to comprise the superfamily Stomioidea (Weitzman, 1974). These generally elongate, darkly-pigmented fishes are characterized by numerous specializations, including presence of a mental barbel associated with the hyoid apparatus, lack of gill rakers in adults, and insertion on the PO (postorbital) photophore of a portion of the adductor mandibulae muscle. By inference from their morphology and numbers, it appears that these organisms are an important component of the oceanic vertebrate fauna.
S272	K. Hayasaka;T. Gojobori;S. Horai	1988	Molecular phylogeny and evolution of primate mitochondrial DNA	Molecular Biology and Evolution	5		626-644				We determined nucleotide sequences of homologous 0.9-kb fragments of mitochondrial DNAs ( mtDNAs ) derived from four species of old-world monkeys, one species of new-world monkeys, and two species of prosimians. With these nucleotide sequences and homologous sequences for five species of hominoids, we constructed a phylogenetic tree for the four groups of primates. The phylogeny obtained is generally consistent with evolutionary trees constructed in previous studies. Our results also suggest that the rate of nucleotide substitution for mtDNAs in hominines (human, chimpanzee, and gorilla) may have slowed down compared with that for old-world monkeys. This evolutionary feature of mitochondrial genes is similar to one found in nuclear genes.
S293	R. O. de Sú;D. M. Hillis	1990	Phylogenetic relationships of the pipid frogs Xenopus and Silurana: an integration of ribosomal DNA and morphology	Molecular Biology and Evolution	7	4	365-376				Relationships of the pipid frog genus Silurana (= Xenopus tropicalis group of some authors) are of particular interest to developmental and molecular biologists because of the purported ancestral (i.e., unduplicated) karyotype of S. tropicalis relative to the genus Xenopus. Although most previous studies have assumed that Silurana is the sister group of Xenopus, recent morphological work suggests that Silurana is more closely related both to the South American genus Pipa and to the African genera Hymenochirus and Pseudhymenochirus than it is to Xenopus. We examined 1,486 bp of relatively variable regions of the ribosomal DNA array (including portions of the 18S and 28S genes, as well as part of an internal transcribed spacer) in Hymenochirus, Silurana, and Xenopus, as well as the outgroup genus Spea, in order to test the alternative hypotheses of relationships for Silurana. Maximum parsimony analysis using bootstrapping and an analysis using Lake's method of invariants both significantly support the sister-group relationship between Xenopus and Silurana rather than the relationship suggested by morphology. Analysis of the combined morphological/molecular data matrix also significantly supports the Xenopus-Silurana relationship. Although our results are not inconsistent with the recognition of the genus Silurana to accommodate the species formerly called X. tropicalis and X. epitropicalis, the proposed relationships do not require the recognition of this genus in order to render Xenopus monophyletic.
S296	S. B. Hedges;K. D. Moberg;L. R. Maxson	1990	Tetrapod phylogeny inferred from 18s and 28s ribosomal RNA sequences and a review of the evidence for amniote relationships	Molecular Biology and Evolution	7	6	607-633				The 18S ribosomal RNAs of 21 tetrapods were sequenced and aligned with five published tetrapod sequences. When the coelacanth was used as an outgroup, Lissamphibia (living amphibians) and Amniota (amniotes) were found to be statistically sign)ficant monophyletic groups. Although little resolution was obtained among the lissamphibian taxa, the amniote sequences support a sister-group relationship between birds and mammals. Portions of the 28S ribosomal RNA ( rRNA ) molecule in 11 tetrapods also were sequenced, although the phylogenetic results were inconclusive. In contrast to previous studies, deletion or down-weighting of base-paired sites were found to have little effect on phylogenetic relationships. Molecular evidence for amniote relationships is reviewed, showing that three genes (beta-hemoglobin, myoglobin, and 18S rRNA) unambiguously support a birdmammal relationship, compared with one gene (histone H2B) that favors a birdcrocodilian clade. Separate analyses of four other genes ( alpha-crystallin A, alphahemoglobin, insulin, and 28S rRNA) and a combined analysis of all sequence data are inconclusive, in that different groups are defined in different analyses and none are strongly supported. It is suggested that until sequences become available from a broader array of taxa, the molecular evidence is best evaluated at the level of individual genes, with emphasis placed on those studies with the greatest number of taxa and sites. When this is done, a bird-mammal relationship is most strongly supported. When regarded in combination with the morphological evidence for this association, it must be considered at least as plausible as a bird-crocodilian relationship.
S3x27x98c14c34c15	T. D. Bruns;T. M. Szaro	1992	Rate and mode differences between nuclear and mitochondrial small-subunit rRNA genes in mushrooms	Molecular Biology and Evolution	9		836-855				Sequences from homologous regions of the nuclear and mitochondrial small-subunit rRNA genes from 10 members of the mushroom order Boletales were used to construct evolutionary trees and to compare the rates and modes of evolution. Trees constructed independently for each gene by parsimony and tested by bootstrap analysis have identical topologies in all statistically significant branches. Examination of base substitutions revealed that the nuclear gene is biased toward C-T transitions and that the distribution of transversions in the mitochondrial gene is strongly effected by an A-T bias. When only homologous regions of the two genes were compared, base substitutions per nucleotide were roughly 16-fold greater in the mitochondrial gene. The difference in the frequency of length mutations was at least as great but was impossible to estimate accurately because of their absence in the nuclear genc. Maximum likelihood was used to show that base-substitution rates vary dramatically among the branches. A significant part of the rate inconstancy was caused by an accelerated nuclcar rate in one branch and a retarded mitochondrial rate in a different branch. A second part of the rate variability involved a consistent inconstancy: short branches exhibit ratios of mitochondrial to nuclear divergences of <1, while longer branches had ratios of ~4.1-8.1. This pattern suggests a systematic error in the branch length calculation. The error may be related to the simplicity of the divergence estimates, which assumes that all base positions have an equal probability of change.
S367	T. P. Friedlander;J. C. Regier;C. Mitter;D. L. Wagner	1996	A nuclear gene for higher level phylogenetics: Phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase tracks Mesozoic-age divergences within Lepidoptera (Insecta)	Molecular Biology and Evolution	13	4	594-604		http://mbe.oxfordjournals.org/cgi/content/abstract/13/4/594		The sequence of phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase (PEPCK) has been previously identified as a promising candidate for reconstructing Mesozoic-age divergences (Friedlander, Regier, and Mitter 1992, 1994). To test this hypothesis more rigorously, 597 nucleotides of aligned PEPCK coding sequence (similar to 30% of the coding region) were generated from 18 species representing Mesozoic-age lineages of moths (Insects: Lepidoptera) and outgroup taxa. Relationships among basal Lepidoptera are well established by morphological analysis, providing a strong test for the utility of a gene which has not previously been used in systematics. Parsimony and other phylogenetic analyses were conducted on nucleotides by codon positions (nt1, nt2, nt3) separately and in combination, and on amino acids, for comparison to the test phylogeny. The highest concordance was achieved with nt1 + nt2, for which one of two most-parsimonious frees was identical to the test phylogeny, and with all nucleotides when nt3 was downweighted sevenfold or higher, for which a single most-parsimonious tree identical to the test phylogeny resulted. Substitutions in nt3 approached saturation in many, but not all, pairwise comparisons and their exclusion or severe downweighting greatly increased the degree of concordance with the test phylogeny. Neighbor-joining analysis confirms this finding. The utility of PEPCK for phylogenetics is demonstrated over a time span for which few other suitable genes are currently available.
S3x30x98c09c15c24	D. S. Hibbett	1996	Phylogenetic evidence for horizontal transmission of group I introns in the nuclear ribosomal DNA of mushroom-forming fungi	Molecular Biology and Evolution	13	7	903-917		http://mbe.oxfordjournals.org/cgi/content/abstract/13/7/903	group I introns; ribosomal DNA; horizontal transmission; phylogeny; fungi; character weighting	Group I introns were discovered inserted at the same position in the nuclear small-subunit ribosomal DNA (nuc-ssu-rDNA) in several species of homobasidiomycetes (mushroom-forming fungi). Based on conserved intron sequences, a pair of intron-specific primers was designed for PCR amplification and sequencing of intron-containing rDNA repeats. Using the intron-specific primers together with flanking rDNA primers, a PCR assay was conducted to determine presence or absence of introns in 39 species of homobasidiomycetes. Introns were confined to the genera Panellus, Clavicorona, and Lentinellus. Phylogenetic analyses of nuc-ssu-rDNA and mitochondrial ssu-rDNA sequences suggest that Clavicorona and Lentinellus are closely related, but that Panellus is not closely related to these. The simplest explanation for the distribution of the introns is that they have been twice independently gained via horizontal transmission, once on the lineage leading to Panellus, and once on the lineage leading to Lentinellus and Clavicorona. BLAST searches using the introns from Panellus and Lentinellus as query sequences retrieved 16 other similar group I introns of nuc-ssu-rDNA and nuclear large-subunit rDNA (nuc-lsu-rDNA) from fungal and green algal hosts. Phylogenetic analyses of intron sequences suggest that the mushroom introns are monophyletic, and are nested within a clade that contains four other introns that insert at the same position as the mushroom introns, two from different groups of fungi and two from green algae. The distribution of host lineages and insertion sites among the introns suggests that horizontal and vertical transmission, homing, and transposition have been factors in intron evolution. As distinctive, heritable features of nuclear rDNAs in certain lineages, group I introns have promise as phylogenetic markers. Nevertheless, the possibility of horizontal transmission and homing also suggest that their use poses certain pitfalls.
S351	G. B. Nunn;S. E. Stanley	1998	Body size effects and rates of cytochrome b evolution in tube-nosed seabirds	Molecular Biology and Evolution	15	10	1360-1371		http://mbe.oxfordjournals.org/cgi/content/abstract/15/10/1360	Procellariiformes; cytochrome b; metabolic rate hypothesis; generation time hypothesis; population size effects; rate heterogeneity; avian systematics	Variation in rates of molecular evolution now appears to be widespread. The demonstration that body size is correlated with rates of molecular evolution suggests that physiological and ecological factors may be involved in molecular rate variation, but large-scale comparative studies are still lacking. Here, we use complete cytochrome b sequences from 85 species of tube-nosed seabirds (order Procellariiformes) and five outgroup species of penguins (order Sphenisciformes) to test for an association between body mass and rates of molecular evolution within the former avian order. Cladistic analysis of the 90 sequences estimates a phylogeny largely consistent with the traditional taxonomy of the Procellariiformes. The Diomedeidae, Procellariidae, and Pelecanoididae are monophyletic, while the Hydrobatidae are basal and paraphyletic. However, the two subfamilies within the Hydrobatidae (Hydrobatinae and Oceanitinae) are monophyletic. A likelihood ratio test detects significant deviation from clocklike evolution in our data. Using a sign test for an association between body mass and branch length in the seabird phylogeny, we find that larger taxa tend to have shorter terminal branch lengths than smaller taxa. This observation suggests that rates of mitochondrial DNA evolution are slower for larger taxa. Rate calibrations based on the fossil record reveal concordant body size effects. We interpret these results as evidence for a metabolic rate effect, as the species in this order exhibit large differences in metabolic rates, which are known to be highly correlated with body mass in this group. Our results support previous findings of body size effects and show that this effect can be significant even within a single avian order. This suggests that even lineage-specific molecular clocks may not be tenable if calibrations involve taxa with different metabolic rates.
S365	S. S. An;B. Mopps;K. Weber;D. Bhattacharya	1999	The origin and evolution of green algal and plant actins	Molecular Biology and Evolution	16	2	275-285		http://mbe.oxfordjournals.org/cgi/content/abstract/16/2/275		The Viridiplantae are subdivided into two groups: the Chlorophyta, which includes the Chlorophyceae, Trebouxiophyceae, Ulvophyceae. and Prasinophyceae; and the Streptophyta, which includes die Charophyceae and all land plants. Within the Streptophyta, the actin genes of the angiosperms diverge nearly simultaneously fi om each other before the separation of monocots and dicots. Previous evolutionary analyses have provided limited insights into the gene duplications that have produced these complex gene families. We address the origin and diversification of land plant actin genes by studying the phylogeny of actins within the green algae, ferns, and fern allies. Partial genomic sequences or cDNAs encoding actin were characterized from Cosmarium botrytis (Zygnematales), Selaginella apoda (Selaginellales), Anemia phyllitidis (Polypodiales), and Psilotum triquetrum (Psilotales). Selaginella contains at least two actin genes. One sequence (Ac2) diverges within a group of fern sequences that also includes the Psilotum Ac1 actin gene and one gymnosperm sequence (Cycas revoluta Cyc3). This clade is positioned outside of the angiosperm actin gene radiation. The second Selaginella sequence (Ac1) is the sister to all remaining land plant actin sequences, although the internal branches in this portion of the tree are ver!: short. Use of complete actin-coding regions in phylogenetic analyses provides support for the separation of angiosperm actins into two classes. N-terminal signature sequence analyses support these groupings. One class (VEG) includes actin genes that are often expressed in vegetative structures. The second class (REP) includes actin genes that trace their ancestry within the vegetative actins and contains members that are largely expressed in reproductive structures. Analysis of intron positions within actin genes shows that sequences from both Selaginella and Cosmarium contain the conserved 20-3, 152-1, and 356-3 introns found in many members of the Streptophyta. In addition, the Cosmarium actin gene contains a novel intron at position 76-1.
S498	D. L. Campbell;A. V. Z. Brower;N. E. Pierce	2000	Molecular Evolution of the Wingless Gene and Its Implications for the Phylogenetic Placement of the Butterfly Family Riodinidae (Lepidoptera: Papilionoidea)	Molecular Biology and Evolution	17	5	684-696		http://mbe.oxfordjournals.org/cgi/content/abstract/17/5/684	Riodinidae; Lycaenidae; Nymphalidae; molecular phylogenetics; wingless, gene utility; third codon positions; maximum likelihood	The sequence evolution of the nuclear gene wingless was investigated among 34 representatives of three lepidopteran families (Riodinidae, Lycaenidae, and Nymphalidae) and four outgroups, and its utility for inferring phylogenetic relationships among these taxa was assessed. Parsimony analysis yielded a well-resolved topology supporting the monophyly of the Riodinidae and Lycaenidae, respectively, and indicating that these two groups are sister lineages, with strong nodal support based on bootstrap and decay indices. Although, wingless provides robust support for relationships within and between the riodinids and the lycaenids, it is less informative about nymphalid relationships. Wingless does not consistently recover nymphalid monophyly or traditional subfamilial relationships within the nymphalids, and nodal support for all but the most recent branches in this family is low. Much of the phylogenetic information in this data set is derived from first- and second-position substitutions. However third positions, despite showing uncorrected pairwise divergences up to 78%, also contain consistent signal at deep nodes within the family Riodinidae and at the node defining the sister relationship between the riodinids and lycaenids. Several hypotheses about how third-position signal has been retained in deep nodes are discussed. These include among-site rate variation, identified as a significant factor by maximum likelihood analyses, and nucleotide bias, a prominent feature of third positions in this data set. Understanding the mechanisms which underlie third-position signal is a first step in applying appropriate models to accommodate the specific evolutionary processes involved in each lineage.
S657	A. R. Omilian;D. J. Taylor	2001	Rate acceleration and long-branch attraction in a conserved gene of cryptic daphniid (Crustacea) species	Molecular Biology and Evolution	18	12	2201-2212		http://mbe.oxfordjournals.org/cgi/content/abstract/18/12/2201		The nuclear large subunit (LSU) rRNA gene is a rich source of phylogenetic characters because of its large size, mosaic of slowly and rapidly evolving regions, and complex secondary structure variation. Nevertheless, many studies have indicated that inconsistency, bias, and gene-specific error (e.g., within-individual gene family variation, cryptic sequence simplicity, and sequence coevolution) can complicate animal phylogenies based on LSU rDNA sequences. However, most of these studies sampled small gene fragments from expansion segments—among animals only five nonchordate complete LSU sequences are published. In this study, we sequenced near-complete nuclear LSU genes from 11 representative daphniids (Crustacea). The daphniid expansion segment V6 was larger and showed more length variation (90–351 bp) than is found in all other reported LSU V6 sequences. Daphniid LSU (without the V6 region) phylogenies generally agreed with the existing phylogenies based on morphology and mtDNA sequences. Nevertheless, a major disagreement between the LSU and the expected trees involved a positively misleading association between the two taxa with the longest branches, Daphnia laevis and D. occidentalis. Both maximum parsimony (MP) and maximum likelihood (ML) optimality criteria recovered this association, but parametric simulations indicated that MP was markedly more sensitive to this bias than ML. Examination of data partitions indicated that the inconsistency was caused by increased nucleotide substitution rates in the branches leading to D. laevis and D. occidentalis rather than among-taxon differences in base composition or distribution of sites that are free to vary. These results suggest that lineage-specific rate acceleration can lead to long-branch attraction even in the conserved genes of animal species that are almost morphologically indistinguishable.
S804	T. Kasuga;T. J. White;J. W. Taylor	2002	Estimation of Nucleotide Substitution Rates in Eurotiomycete Fungi	Molecular Biology and Evolution	19	12	2318-2324		http://mbe.oxfordjournals.org/cgi/content/short/19/12/2318	synonymous substitution rates; molecular clock; plectomycete; fungi; evolution; ITS	In the entire fungal kingdom, only DNA substitution rates in the SSU rRNA gene (Berbee and Taylor 1993, 2001) and amino acid substitution rates (Heckman et al. 2001) have been estimated and used to date fungal divergences. However, these molecules are not sufficiently variable to date events at or below the genus level. DNA sequences of protein-coding genes and the internal transcribed spacer (ITS) region are sufficiently variable, but their substitution rates are not known. In this article, we investigated the DNA substitution rates in the protein-coding genes and the ITS region by comparison with the SSU rDNA divergence in a representative fungal lineage, Eurotiomycetes (=plectomycetes) (Eriksson and Winka 1998). The Eurotiomycete lineage is a monophyletic class of Ascomycota (Berbee and Taylor 1992) and includes many economically important fungi, such as Penicillium chrysogenum (antibiotic production) and Aspergillus oryzae (soy sauce production), as well as many human pathogens such as Coccidioides immitis (lung disease), Histoplasma capsulatum (lung disease), and Trichophyton rubrum (athlete's foot). Estimating DNA substitution rates in quickly evolving molecules such as the ITS and protein-coding genes will not only provide a means to estimate the divergence times between lineages at and below the genus level, but in conjunction with coalescent theory, it may provide information for estimating epidemiological parameters such as effective population size (Watterson 1975) and recombination rates (Hey and Wakeley 1997).
S652	M. P. Simmons;C. P. Randle;J. V. Freudenstein;J. W. Wenzel	2002	Limitations of Relative Apparent Synapomorphy Analysis (RASA) for measuring phylogenetic signal	Molecular Biology and Evolution	19	1	14-23		http://mbe.oxfordjournals.org/cgi/content/abstract/19/1/14	relative apparent synapomorphy analysis; RASA; phylogenetic signal; long-branch attraction; outgroup selection	In this paper we use hypothetical and empirical data matrices to evaluate the ability of relative apparent synapomorphy analysis (RASA) to measure phylogenetic signal, select outgroups, and identify terminals subject to long-branch attraction. In all cases, except for equal character-state frequencies, RASA indicated extraordinarily high levels of phylogenetic information for hypothetical data matrices that are uninformative regarding relationships among the terminals. Yet, regardless of the number of characters or character-state frequencies, RASA failed to detect phylogenetic signal for hypothetical matrices with strong phylogenetic signal. In our empirical example, RASA indicated increasing phylogenetic signal for matrices for which the strict consensus of the most parsimonious trees is increasingly poorly resolved, clades are increasingly poorly supported, and for which many relationships are in conflict with more widely sampled analyses. RASA is an ineffective approach to identify outgroup terminal(s) with the most plesiomorphic character states for the ingroup. Our hypothetical example demonstrated that RASA preferred outgroup terminals with increasing numbers of convergent character states with ingroup terminals, and rejected the outgroup terminal with all plesiomorphic character states. Our empirical example demonstrated that RASA, in all three cases examined, selected an ingroup terminal, rather than an outgroup terminal, as the best outgroup. In no case was one of the two outgroup terminals even close to being considered the optimal outgroup by RASA. RASA is an ineffective means of identifying problematic long-branch terminals. In our hypothetical example, RASA indicated a terminal as being a problematic long-branch terminal in spite of the terminal being on a zero-length branch and having no possibility of undergoing long-branch attraction with another terminal. RASA also failed to identify actual problematic long-branch terminals that did undergo long-branch attraction, but only after following Lyons-Weiler and Hoelzer's (1997) three-step process to identify and remove terminals subject to long-branch attraction. We conclude that RASA should not be used for any of these purposes.
S1170	M. Staats;P. v Baarlen;J. A. L. v Kan	2004	Molecular Phylogeny of the plant pathogenic genus Botrytis and the evolution of host specificity	Molecular Biology and Evolution							The cosmopolitan genus Botrytis contains 22 recognized species and one hybrid. The current classification is largely based on morphological characters and to a minor extent on physiology and host range. In this study, a classification of the genus was constructed based on DNA sequence data of three nuclear protein-coding genes (RPB2, G3PDH and HSP60) and compared with the traditional classification. Sexual reproduction and the host range, important fitness traits, were traced in the tree and used for the identification of major evolutionary events during speciation. The phylogenetic analysis corroborated the classical species delineation. In addition, the hybrid status of B. allii (B. byssoidea x B. aclada) was confirmed. Both individual gene trees and combined trees show that the genus Botrytis can be divided into two clades, radiating after the separation of Botrytis from other Sclerotiniaceae genera. Clade I contains four species that all colonize exclusively eudicot hosts, whereas clade II contains 18 species which are pathogenic either on eudicot (5) or monocot (13) hosts. A comparison of Botrytis and angiosperm phylogenies shows that cospeciation of pathogens and their hosts have not occurred during their respective evolution. Rather we propose that host shifts have occurred during Botrytis speciation, possibly by the acquisition of novel virulence factors. Loss of sexual reproduction has occurred at least three times and is supposed to be a consequence of negative selection.
S1419	A. L. Rychel;S. E. Smith;H. T. Shimamoto;B. J. Swalla	2006	Evolution and Development of the Chordates: Collagen and Pharyngeal Cartilage	Molecular Biology and Evolution	23	3	541-549	10.1093/molbev/msj055			Chordates evolved a unique body plan within deuterostomes and are considered to share five morphological characters,a muscular postanal tail, a notochord, a dorsal neural tube, an endostyle, and pharyngeal gill slits. The phylum Chordata typically includes three subphyla, Cephalochordata, Vertebrata, and Tunicata, the last showing a chordate body plan only as a larva. Hemichordates, in contrast, have pharyngeal gill slits, an endostyle, and a postanal tail but appear to lack a notochord and dorsal neural tube. Because hemichordates are the sister group of echinoderms, the morphological features shared with the chordates must have been present in the deuterostome ancestor. No extant echinoderms share any of the chordate features, so presumably they have lost these structures evolutionarily. We review the development of chordate characters in hemichordates and present new data characterizing the pharyngeal gill slits and their cartilaginous gill bars. We show that hemichordate gill bars contain collagen and proteoglycans but are acellular. Hemichordates and cephalochordates, or lancelets, show strong similarities in their gill bars, suggesting that an acellular cartilage may have preceded cellular cartilage in deuterostomes. Our evidence suggests that the deuterostome ancestor was a benthic worm with gill slits and acellular gill cartilages.
S1597	M. Kullberg;M. A. Nilsson;U. Arnason;E. H. Harley;A. Janke	2006	Housekeeping Genes for Phylogenetic Analysis of Eutherian Relationships	Molecular Biology and Evolution	23		1493-1503				The molecular relationship of placental mammals has attracted great interest in recent years. However, 2 crucial and conflicting hypotheses remain, one with respect to the position of the root of the eutherian tree and the other the relationship between the orders Rodentia, Lagomorpha (rabbits, hares), and Primates. Although most mitochondrial (mt) analyses have suggested that rodents have a basal position in the eutherian tree, some nuclear data in combination with mt-rRNA genes have placed the root on the so-called African clade or on a branch that includes this clade and the Xenarthra (e.g., anteater and armadillo). In order to generate a new and independent set of molecular data for phylogenetic analysis, we have established cDNA sequences from different tissues of various mammalian species. With this in mind, we have identified and sequenced 8 housekeeping genes with moderately fast rate of evolution from 22 placental mammals, representing 11 orders. In order to determine the root of the eutherian tree, the same genes were also sequenced for 3 marsupial species, which were used as outgroup. Inconsistent with the analyses of nuclear 1 mt-rRNA gene data, the current data set did not favor a basal position of the African clade or Xenarthra in the eutherian tree. Similarly, by joining rodents and lagomorphs on the same basal branch (Glires hypothesis), the data set is also inconsistent with the tree commonly favored in mtDNA analyses. The analyses of the currently established sequences have helped examination of problematic parts in the eutherian tree at the same time as they caution against suggestions that have claimed that basal eutherian relationships have been conclusively settled.
S1818	C. Bleidorn;I. Eeckhaut;L. Podsiadlowski;N. Schult;D. McHugh;K. M. Halanych;M. C. Milinkovitch;R. Tiedemann	2007	Mitochondrial genome and nuclear sequence data support Myzostomida as part of the annelid radiation	Molecular Biology and Evolution							The echinoderm symbionts Myzostomida are marine worms that show an enigmatic lophotrochozoan body plan. Historically, their phylogenetic origins were obscured due to disagreement about which morphological features are evolutionarily conserved, but now most morphological evidence points to annelid origins. In contrast, recent phylogenetic analyses using different molecular markers produced variable results regarding the position of myzostomids, but all suggested these worms are not derived annelids. To re-examine this issue, we analyzed data from nuclear genes (18S rDNA, 28S rDNA, Myosin II, and Elongation Factor-1&#61537;), and a nearly complete myzostomid mitochondrial genome. Here, we show that the molecular data are in agreement with the morphological evidence that myzostomids are part of the annelid radiation. This result is robustly supported by mitochondrial (gene order and sequence data) and nuclear data, as well as by recent ultrastructural investigations. Using Bayes factor comparison, alternative hypotheses are shown to lack support. Thus, myzostomids probably evolved from a segmented ancestor and gained a derived anatomy during their long evolutionary history of echinoderm symbionts.
S1884	B. Hausdorf;M. Helmkampf;A. Meyer;A. Witek;H. Herlyn;I. Bruchhaus;T. Hankeln;T. H. Struck;B. Lieb	2007	Spiralian phylogenomics supports the resurrection of Bryozoa comprising Ectoprocta and Entoprocta	Molecular Biology and Evolution							Phylogenetic analyses based on 79 ribosomal proteins of 38 metazoans, partly derived from six new EST projects for Ectoprocta, Entoprocta, Sipuncula, Annelida and Acanthocephala, indicate the monophyly of Bryozoa comprising Ectoprocta and Entoprocta, two taxa which have been separated for more than a century based on seemingly profound morphological differences. Our results also show that bryozoans are more closely related to Neotrochozoa including molluscs and annelids than to Syndermata, the latter comprising Rotifera and Acanthocephala. Furthermore, we find evidence for the position of Sipuncula within Annelida. These findings suggest that classical developmental and morphological key characters such as cleavage pattern, coelomic cavities, gut architecture and body segmentation are subject to greater evolutionary plasticity than traditionally assumed.
S1979	T. H. Struck;F. Fisse	2008	Phylogenetic position of Nemertea derived from phylogenomic data	Molecular Biology and Evolution							Nemertea and Platyhelminthes have traditionally been grouped together because they possess a so-called acoelomate organization, but lateral vessels and rhynchocoel of nemerteans have been regarded as coelomic cavities. Additionally both taxa show spiral cleavage patterns prompting the placement of Nemertea as sister to coelomate Protostomia, i.e., either to Neotrochozoa (Mollusca and Annelida) or to Teloblastica (Neotrochozoa plus Arthropoda). Some workers maintain a sister group relationship of Nemertea and Platyhelminthes as Parenchymia, because of an assumed homology of Götte‚s and Müller‚s larvae of polyclad Platyhelminthes and the pilidium larvae of heteronemerteans. So far molecular data were only able to significantly reject a sister group relationship to Teloblastica. Although phylogenomic data are available for Platyhelminthes, Annelida, Mollusca, and Arthropoda, they are lacking for Nemertea. Herein, we present the first analysis specifically addressing nemertean phylogenetic position using phylogenomic data. More specifically, we collected EST data from Lineus viridis (O.F. Müller, 1774) and combined it with available data to produce a dataset of 9,377 amino acid positions from 60 ribosomal proteins. Maximum likelihood analyses and Bayesian inferences place Nemertea in a clade together with Annelida and Mollusca. Furthermore, hypothesis testing significantly rejected a sister group relationship to either Platyhelminthes or Teloblastica. The Coelomata hypothesis, which groups coelomate taxa together to the exclusion of acoelomate and pseudocoelomate taxa, is not congruent with our results. Thus, the supposed acoelomate organization evolved independently in Nemertea and Platyhelminthes. In Nemertea, evolution of acoely is most likely due to a secondary reduction of the coelom as it is found in certain species of Mollusca and Annelida. Though looking very similar, the Götte‚s and Müller‚s larvae of polyclad Platyhelminthes are not homologous to the pilidium larvae of heteronemerteans. Finally, the convergent evolution of segmentation in Annelida and Arthropoda is further substantiated.
S2492	D. M. Simon;S. A. Kelchner;S. Zimmerly	2009	A broad-scale phylogenetic analysis of group II intron RNAs and intron-encoded reverse transcriptases	Molecular Biology and Evolution	26	12	2795-2808	10.1093/molbev/msp193			Group II introns are self-splicing RNAs that are frequently assumed to be the ancestors of spliceosomal introns. They are widely distributed in bacteria and are also found in organelles of plants, fungi, and protists. In this study, we present a broad-scale phylogenetic analysis of group II introns using sequence data from both the conserved RNA structure and the intron-encoded reverse transcriptase (RT). Two similar phylogenies are estimated for the RT ORF, based on either amino acid or nucleotide sequence, while one phylogeny is produced for the RNA. In making these estimates, we confronted nearly all of the classic challenges to phylogenetic inference including positional saturation, base composition heterogeneity, short internodes with low support, and sensitivity to taxon sampling. While the major lineages are well-defined, robust resolution of topology is not possible between these lineages. The approximately unbiased (AU) and Shimodaira-Hasegawa (SH) topology tests indicated that the RT ORF and RNA ribozyme data sets are in significant conflict under a variety of models, revealing the possibility of imperfect coevolution between group II introns and their intron-encoded ORFs. The high level of sequence divergence, large time scale, and limited number of alignable characters in our study are representative of many reverse transcriptases and group I introns, and our results suggest that phylogenetic analyses of any of these sequences could suffer from the same sources of error and instability identified in this study.
S2456	S. Simon;S. Strauss;A. von Haeseler;H. Hadrys	2009	A phylogenomic approach to resolve the basal pterygote divergence	Molecular Biology and Evolution	26	12	2719-2730	10.1093/molbev/msp191			One of the most fascinating Bauplan transitions in the animal kingdom was the invention of insect wings, a change which also contributed to the success and enormous diversity of this animal group. However, the origin of insect flight and the relationships of basal winged insect orders are still controversial. Three hypotheses have been proposed to explain the phylogeny of winged insects: (i) the traditional Palaeoptera hypothesis (Ephemeroptera+Odonata, Neoptera), (ii) the Metapterygota (Ephemeroptera, Odonata+Neoptera) and (iii) the Chiastomyaria hypothesis (Odonata, Ephemeroptera+Neoptera). Neither phylogenetic analyses of single genes nor even multiple marker systems (e.g. molecular markers + morphological characters) have yet been able to conclusively resolve basal pterygote divergences. A possible explanation for the lack of resolution is that the divergences took place in the mid-Devonian within a short period of time, and attempts to solve this problem have been confounded by the major challenge of finding molecular markers to accurately track these short ancient internodes. Although phylogenomic data are available for Neoptera and some wingless (apterygote) orders, they are lacking for the crucial Odonata and Ephemeroptera orders. We adopt a multi-gene approach including data from two new EST projects from the orders Ephemeroptera (Baetis sp.) and Odonata (Ischnura elegans) to evaluate the potential of phylogenomic analyses in clarifying this unresolved issue. We analyzed two data sets that differed in represented taxa, genes and overall sequence lengths: maxspe (15 taxa, 125 genes, 31,643 amino acid positions), maxgen (8 taxa, 150 genes, 42,541 amino acid positions). Maximum likelihood and Bayesian inference analyses both place the Odonata at the base of the winged insects. Furthermore, statistical hypotheses testing rejected both the Palaeoptera and the Metapterygota hypotheses. The comprehensive molecular data set developed here provides conclusive support for odonates as the most basal winged insect order (Chiastomyaria hypothesis). Data quality assessment indicates that proteins involved in cellular processes and signaling harbor the most informative phylogenetic signal.
S812	M. Sauer;P. Lu;R. Sangari;S. Kennedy;J. Polishook;G. Bills;Z. An	1992	Estimating polyketide metabolic potential among non-sporulating fungal endophytes of Vaccinium macrocarpon	Molecular Ecology	106		460-470				A set of 23 non-sporulating, unidentifiable endophytic fungi associated with wild Vaccinium macrocarpon were examined for their polyketide metabolite producing potential. Using two degenerate polymerase chain reaction primers (FPKSKSU-2 and FPKSKSD-1), we cloned and sequenced 12 ketosynthase domains from 11 of the 23 cranberry endophytic fungi. Phylogenetic analyses segregated the 12 ketosynthase domains into three groups. One group of four sequences was clustered with polyketide synthase genes involved in melanin formation. The second group of two ketosynthase sequences clustered with aflatoxin encoding fungal polyketide synthases. The remaining six ketosynthase domains were not clustered with any of the known fungal polyketide synthase groups. Of the 12 ketosynthase fragments, five contained one or more introns in the ~800 bp DNA region. In order to locate the phylogenetic origin of the polyketide synthase genes, phylogenetic relationships of the strains were inferred from small subunit ribosomal DNA sequences. Analyses of small subunit ribosomal DNA sequences showed that all but one of the strains grouped among the major clades of the ascomycetes. The exceptional strain, CR70, was probably an oomycete. Thirteen of the 22 ascomycetous fungi appeared within a clade that included Oidiodendron tenuissimum of the Myxotrichaceae.
S509	E. Lieckfeldt;C. M. Kullnig;C. P. Kubicek;G. J. Samuels;T. Börner	2001	Trichoderma aureoviride: phylogenetic position and characterization	Molecular Ecology	105	3	313–322	10.1017/S0953756201003616			The identity of strains identified as Trichoderma aureoviride/Hypocrea aureoviridis was reconsidered. Trichoderma aureoviride was isolated originally from a specimen identified as H. aureoviridis and thus is H. aureoviridis. The morphological and molecular characters of most strains identified as T. aureoviride differ from those of the ex-type but are more typical of T. harzianum, a member of sect. Pachybasium. Molecular data do not support inclusion of T. aureoviride in sect. Trichoderma, nor was there strong phenotypic similarity between H. aureoviridis and H. rufa. In the ITS phylogeny the T. aureoviride ex-type and other collections of H. aureoviridis form a strongly supported clade that is separate from any other recognized section of Trichoderma. Hypocrea vinosa, which was originally included in the T. aureoviride aggregate species concept, is distinct from T. aureoviride. but closely allied with H. rufa/T. viride. Trichoderma aureoviride/H. aureoviridis is a rare species, restricted to the UK and the Netherlands. We redefine T. aureoviride, limiting it to strains with very slow growth rate, effuse conidiation, and the ITS-1 and 2 sequence type D.
S493	S. Pažoutová	2001	The phylogeny and evolution of the genus Claviceps	Molecular Ecology	105	3	275-283	10.1017/S0953756201003562			Phylogenetic trees of 16 Claviceps species were constructed based on alignment of 5.8S rDNA and the adjacent ITS1 and ITS2 spacers. Two highly supported clades were found: 1. C. paspali, C. zizaniae, C. grohii, C. sulcata, C. fusiformis and C. purpurea and 2. C. citrina, C. phalaridis, two unidentified Claviceps spp. (isolates PM and SG), C. sorghicola, C. gigantea, C. sorghi, C. africana, C. viridis and C. pusilla. No relationship was found between the species placement and its morphological markers. The probe from C. purpurea gene cpd1 for dimethylallyl tryptophan synthase, the first enzyme of alkaloid biosynthesis, was hybridized to PstI digested genomes of the above species under non-stringent conditions. Hybridizing DNA was present in all species of clade 1, although the signal of the C. paspali gene was weaker. In clade 2, only C. africana, C. gigantea, and C. pusilla gave weak positive signals. Colorimetric detection found small amounts of alkaloids in cultures of Claviceps sp. SG and PM but despite that, no cpd1 hybridizing bands were found. The occurrence of two major clades of Claviceps and their biogeography suggests, that the genus originates from South America and that the evolution of its species was influenced by comigration with their hosts and with the global climatic changes that influenced spreading of grass subfamilies.
S821	D. G. Kelch;B. G. Baldwin	2002	Phylogeny and ecological radiation of New World thistles (Cirsium, Cardueae -- Compositae) based on ITS and ETS rDNA sequence data	Molecular Ecology	12	1	141-151	10.1046/j.1365-294X.2003.01710.x		Cardueae; Cirsium; Compositae; evolution; phylogeny; radiation	Sequence data from a portion of the external transcribed spacer (ETS) and internal transcribed spacers (ITS-1 and ITS-2) of 18S-26S nuclear ribosomal DNA were used to resolve historical biogeography and ecology of true thistles (Cirsium, Cardueae, Compositae) in the New World. The 650 base-pair, 3' portion of the ETS examined here showed a level of variation across taxa similar to that of the ITS sequences included. A maximum-likelihood tree based on combined ETS and ITS sequences leads us to suggest that the New World species of true thistles constitute a major lineage, which in turn comprises several smaller lineages. A western North American lineage shows weak quartet-puzzling support, but includes a well-supported lineage of species endemic to the California Floristic Province. Comparisons of this Californian lineage with other neoendemic angiosperm groups of the region show that the Californian Cirsium lineage exhibits unusually high ecological diversity for a group displaying such low levels of rDNA sequence divergence across taxa. Similarly low levels of sequence divergence were found throughout the New World Cirsium lineage. These results indicate either that Cirsium underwent a rapid ecological radiation in North America, or that rDNA evolution in North American Cirsium has been highly conservative.
S728	A. Rokas;R. J. Atkinson;J. L. Nieves-Aldrey;S. A. West;G. N. Stone	2002	The incidence and diversity of Wolbachia in gallwasps (Hymenoptera; Cynipidae) on oak	Molecular Ecology	11	9	1815-1829	10.1046/j.1365-294X.2002.01556.x		ftsZ; gallwasp; horizontal transmission; thelytoky; Wolbachia; wsp	Wolbachia bacteria infect ≈ 20% of all insect species, and cause a range of alterations to host reproduction, including imposition of thelytoky. The incidence and phenotypic impact of Wolbachia remains to be established in many insect taxa, and considerable research effort is currently focused on its association with particular reproductive modes and the relative importance of the various pathways via which infection occurs. Gallwasps represent an attractive system for addressing these issues for two reasons. First, they show a diversity of reproductive modes (including arrhenotoky, thelytoky and cyclical parthenogenesis) in which the impact of Wolbachia infection can be examined. Second, they occupy two intimately linked trophic niches (gall-inducers and inquilines) between which there is potential for the horizontal exchange of Wolbachia infection. In the arrhenotokous gallwasp lineages screened to date (the herb-galling 'Aylacini' and the rose-galling Diplolepidini), Wolbachia infection always induces thelytoky. The impact of Wolbachia in other arrhenotokous clades, and in the cyclically parthenogenetic clades remains unknown. Here we use polymerase chain reaction (PCR) screening and sequence data for two Wolbachia genes (wsp and ftsZ) to examine the prevalence and incidence of Wolbachia infection in 64 species (a total of 609 individuals) in two further tribes: the arrhenotokous inquilines (tribe Synergini), and the cyclically parthenogenetic oak gallwasps (tribe Cynipini). We ask: (i) whether Wolbachia infection has any apparent impact on host reproduction in the two tribes and (ii) whether there is any correlation between Wolbachia infection and the apparent lack of an arrhenotokous generation in many oak gallwasp life cycles. We show: (i) that Wolbachia infection is rare in the Cynipini. Infected species show no deviation from cyclical parthenogenesis, and infection is no more common in species known only from a thelytokous generation; (ii) that there is a higher incidence of infection within the arrhenotokous inquilines, and generally in gallwasp tribes without cyclical parthenogensis; (iii) all Wolbachia-positive inquiline species are known to possess males, implying either that Wolbachia infection does not result in loss of sex in this tribe or, more probably, that (as for some rose gallwasps) Wolbachia infection leads to loss of sex in specific populations; and (iv) although we find some inquilines and gall inducers to be infected with Wolbachia having the same wsp sequence, these hosts are not members of the same gall communities, arguing against frequent horizontal transmission between these two trophic groups. We suggest that exchange may be mediated by the generalist parasitoids common in oak galls.
S860	M. P. S. Camara;A. W. Ramaley;L. A. Castlebury;M. E. Palm	2003	Neosphaeria and Phaeosphaeriopsis, segregates of Paraphaeosphaeria	Molecular Ecology							Two new genera, Neosphaeria and Phaeosphaeriopsis, are described to accommodate species of Paraphaeosphaeria that are not congeneric with that genus based on morphological characters, results of ITS and 18S rDNA sequence analyses, and base pair comparisons. Paraphaeosphaeria sensu stricto is restricted to species with two-septate ascospores and anamorphs that produce non-septate, smooth, pale brown conidia enteroblastically. Species in Neosphaeria have 3- or 4-septate ascospores and anamorphs that produce ovoid to ellipsoid, nonseptate, brown, verrucose or punctate conidia from percurrently proliferating conidiogenous cells. Paraphaeosphaeria barrii, P. conglomerata, P. filamentosa and P. quadriseptata are transferred to Neosphaeria. At present all species in the genus occur on Yucca (Agavaceae). Phaeosphaeriopsis is described for species that produce 4- or 5-septate ascospores. Known anamorphs produce cylindrical, 0- to 3- septate, brown, punctate conidia from percurrently proliferating conidiogenous cells or bacillar conidia from phialides. Paraphaeosphaeria agavensis, P. glauco-punctata, P. nolinae, and P. obtusispora are transferred to Phaeosphaeriopsis. Phaeosphaeriopsis amblyspora is described as a new species.
S994	T. H. de Koker;K. K. Nakasone;J. Haarhof;H. H. J. Burdsall;B. J. H. Janse	2003	Phylogenetic relationships of the genus Phanerochaete inferred from the internal transcribed spacer region	Molecular Ecology	107		1032-1040				Phanerochaete is a genus of resupinate homobasidiomycetes that are saprophytic on woody debris and logs. Morphological studies in the past indicated that Phanerochaete is a heterogeneous assemblage of species. In this study the internal transcribed spacer (ITS) region of the nuclear ribosomal DNA was used to test the monophyly of the genus Phanerochaete and to infer phylogenetic relationships of the 24 taxa studied. Maximum parsimony, maximum likelihood, and Bayesian analyses do not support the monophyly of the genus. However, a core group of species represented by Phanerochaete velutina, P. chrysosporium, P. sordida, P. sanguinea and others are closely related and group together in a clade. Other common Phanerochaete species including Phanerochaete rimosa, P. chrysorhiza, P. omnivora, P. avellanea, P. tuberculata, P. flava, and P. allantospora, however, do not cluster with the core Phanerochaete group.
S960	T. Kasuga;T. J. White;G. Koenig;J. McEwen;A. Restrepo;E. Castaneda;C. d S. Lacaz;E. M. Heins-Vaccari;R. S. de Freitas;R. M. Zancope-Oliveira;Z. Qin;R. Negroni;D. A. Carter;Y. Mikami;M. Tamura;M. L. Taylor;G. F. Miller;N. Poonwan;J. W. Taylor	2003	Phylogeography of the Fungal Pathogen Histoplasma capsulatum	Molecular Ecology							Until recently, Histoplasma capsulatum was believed to harbor three varieties; var. capsulatum (chiefly a New World human pathogen), var. duboisii (an African human pathogen) and var. farciminosum (an Old World horse pathogen), which varied in clinical manifestations and geographical distribution. We analyzed the phylogenetic relationships of 137 individuals representing the three varieties from six continents using DNA sequence variation in four independent protein-coding genes. At least eight clades were identified: (1) North American class 1 clade, (2) North American class 2 clade, (3) Latin American group A clade, (4) Latin American group B clade, (5) Australian clade, (6) Netherlands (Indonesian?) clade, (7) Eurasian clade, and (8) African clade. Seven of eight clades represented genetically isolated groups that may be recognized as phylogenetic species. The sole exception was the Eurasian clade, which originated from within the Latin American group A clade. The phylogenetic relationships among the clades made a star phylogeny. H. capsulatum var. capsulatum individuals were found in all eight clades. The African clade included all of the H. capsulatum var. duboisii individuals, as well as individuals of the other two varieties. The thirteen individuals of var. farciminosum were distributed among three phylogenetic species. These findings suggest that the three varieties of Histoplasma are phylogenetically meaningless. Instead we have to recognize the existence of genetically distinct geographical populations or phylogenetic species. Combining DNA substitution rates of protein-coding genes with the phylogeny suggests that the radiation of Histoplasma started between three and thirteen million years ago in Latin America.
S840	E. Mwenje;B. D. Wingfield;M. P. A. Coetzee;M. J. Wingfield	2003	Molecular characterisation of Armillaria species from Zimbabwe	Molecular Ecology							Armillaria species are amongst the most important pathogens of trees and have a world-wide distribution. In recent years, the taxonomy of Northern Hemisphere Armillaria spp. has been extensively treated, but those occurring in Africa are poorly known. Previously, isolates of Armillaria from Zimbabwe have been grouped based on morphology and biochemical tests. In this study, six isolates representing the three previously characterised groups of Armillaria spp. occurring in Zimbabwe were analysed using DNA-based techniques. Three distinct clusters emerged from both PCR-RFLP and analysis of sequence data for the IGS-1 rRNA operon. The three groups corresponded to those previously identified based on morphology and biochemical tests. Differences in IGS-1 sequences strongly suggest that the Zimbabwean groups represent three distinct taxa. Isolates belonging to group I, previously assumed to be to A. heimii were similar to those identified as A. fuscipes from South Africa and La Reunion. Group II isolates resided in a clade apart from all other isolates and appear to represent A. heimii. The remaining isolates residing in Group III clustered with isolates from Zambia and Cameroon. These are different to A. heimii and A. fuscipes and apparently represent an undescribed taxon.
S878	U. Peintner;H. Ladurner;G. Simonini	2003	Xerocomus cisalpinus sp. nov. and the delimitation of species in the Xerocomus chrysenteron complex based on morphology and rDNA-LSU sequences	Molecular Ecology							Species delimitation is still controversial in the Xerocomus chrysenteron complex. We have therefore established comprehensible and reliable species concepts based on statistical evaluation of morphological and ecological characters. We extensively examined many collections from different geographical regions and different developmental stages within collections. Quantitative micromorphological characters (basidiospores, pileipellis end cells) were measured in statistically relevant numbers. The same material was used to generate 24 rDNA LSU sequences, and the results of phylogenetic analyses clearly confirmed our species concepts: Spore size and ornamentation, length of the pileipellis end cells and pruinatus-hyphae are most valuable characters for the delimitation of species in this complex. Molecular data demonstrated that the X. chrysenteron complex is a monophyletic group. All the examined species (X. chrysenteron, X. cisalpinus X. pruinatus, X. ripariellus, X. dryophilus, X. fennicus, X. porosporus, X. rubellus) represent independent lineages. The faintly striate spores, a key character characterising species of section Striatulispori, probably evolved independently. In addition, the pruinatus-hyphae have multiple origins, and. truncate spore apices are derived at least twice. Xerocomus cisalpinus sp. nov. is characterised by striate spores, the presence of pruinatus-hyphae and a pileipellis strongly reminiscent of X. chrysenteron. For reasons of discussion, microscopical data are presented for Boletellus episcopalis for the first time. Xerocomus fennicus comb. nov. is proposed. We provided detailed descriptions and a key for all included taxa. Our results once more demonstrate, that reliably identified and characterised voucher collections are the basic requirement for meaningful phylogenetic studies.
S887	A. Rokas;R. J. Atkinson;L. Webster;G. N. Stone	2003	Out of Anatolia: Longitudinal gradients in genetic diversity support a Turkish origin for a circum-mediterranean oak gallwasp Andricus quercustozae	Molecular Ecology							Many studies have addressed the latitudinal gradients in intraspecific genetic diversity of European taxa generated during post-glacial range expansion from southern refuges. Though Asia Minor is known to be a centre of diversity for many taxa, relatively few studies have considered its potential role as a Pleistocene refuge or a potential source for more ancient westward range expansion into Europe. Here we address these issues for an oak gallwasp, Andricus quercustozae (Hymenoptera: Cynipidae), whose distribution extends from Morocco along the northern coast of the Mediterranean through Anatolia to Iran. We use sequence data for a fragment of the mitochondrial gene cytochrome b and allele frequency data for 12 polymorphic allozyme loci to answer the following questions: (1) Which regions represent current centres of genetic diversity for A. quercustozae? Does Asia Minor represent a discrete glacial refuge? (2) Can we infer the timescale and sequence of the colonisation processes linking current centres of diversity? Does available evidence support the conclusion that Asia Minor is the pre-glacial centre of origin for this species? Our results suggest that A. quercustozae was present in five distinct refuges (Iberia, Italy, the Balkans, south-western Anatolia and north-eastern Anatolia) with recent genetic exchange between the Italian and Hungarian refuges. The refuge(s) in Anatolia harbour the highest levels of genetic diversity, consistent with the conclusion that European populations are either (a) derived from Asia Minor, or (b) subject to more frequent population bottlenecks. Though Iberian populations show the lowest diversity for putatively selectively neutral markers, they have colonised a new oak host and represent a genetically and biologically discrete entity within the species.
S952	S. R. Santos;T. L. Shearer;A. R. Hannes;M. A. Coffroth	2003	Fine-scale specificity and diversity in the most prevalent lineage of symbiotic dinoflagellates (Symbiodinium, Dinophyceae) in the Caribbean	Molecular Ecology							The success of coral reefs is due to obligate mutualistic symbioses involving invertebrates and photosynthetic dinoflagellate symbionts belonging to the genus Symbiodinum. In the Caribbean, the vast majority of octocorals and other invertebrate hosts associate with Symbiodinium clade B, and more selectively, with a single lineage of this clade, Symbiodinium B1/B184. Although Symbiodinium B1/B184 represents the most prevalent Symbiodinium in the Caribbean, it is unknown whether it represents a single evolutionary lineage or is comprised of distinct sublineages. To explore this question, the flanking regions of two polymorphic microsatellites were sequenced from a series of Symbiodinium clade B cultures along with Symbiodinium B1/B184 populations of the octocorals Pseudopterogorgia elisabethae, P. bipinnata, and Gorgonia ventalina. Seven distinct sequence variants, referred to as phylotypes, were identified from these samples and their phylogenetic relationships inferred. Five of the phylotypes belonged to Symbiodinium B1/B184, providing the first evidence that the lineage is comprised of distinct sublineages. Furthermore, identification of specific Symbiodinium B1/B184 phylotypes associated with sympatric P. elisabethae and P. bipinnata at San Salvador, Bahamas, demonstrate unequivocally the existence of fine-scale specificity between Caribbean octocorals and these algae. Taken together, this study exemplifies the complex nature of Symbiodinium biodiversity and specificity.
S892	A. M. Schurko;L. Mendoza;C. A. Levesque;N. L. Desaulniers;A. W. A. M. de Cock;G. R. Klassen	2003	A molecular phylogeny of Pythium insidiosum	Molecular Ecology							Sequence analysis of the ribosomal DNA internal transcribed spacers (ITS) was used to establish phylogenetic relationships among 23 isolates of Pythium insidiosum, the etiological agent of pythiosis in mammals. The isolates were divided into three distinct clades which exhibited significant geographic isolation. Clade I consisted of isolates from North and South America while clade II contained isolates from Asia and Australia. Also present in clade II was an isolate from a patient in United States, but the origin of infection may in fact be in the Middle East. Clade III was comprised of isolates from Thailand and the United States. All 23 P. insidiosum isolates were more closely related to each other than to any other Pythium species in this study. Additionally, all Pythium isolates formed a clade separate from both outgroup species, Phytophthora megasperma and Lagenidium giganteum. The ITS sequence results tend to support evidence for geographic variants within P. insidiosum or that P. insidiosum is in fact comprised of more than one species. As well, the sequence information obtained provides an abundance of molecular data for applications in the diagnosis of pythiosis and identification of P. insidiosum from clinical samples.
S948	H. Voglmayr	2003	Phylogenetic relationships of Peronospora and related genera based on nuclear ribosomal ITS sequences	Molecular Ecology	107						In order to investigate phylogenetic relationships of selected members of Peronosporaceae of the genera Pythium, Halophytophthora, Phytophthora, and Peronophythora, Bayesian analysis of partial sequences of the ITS1-5.8S-ITS2 region was performed. In addition, sequences of the complete ITS1-5.8S-ITS2 region were analysed for 101 collections belonging to the genera Peronospora, Hyaloperonospora, Perofascia, Pseudoperonospora, Phytophthora and Peronophythora, using Bayesian inference of phylogeny and maximum parsimony. The results confirm a close relationship of these genera. The strongly supported Peronosporaceae clade is located within the paraphyletic genus Phytophthora (including Peronophythora). Monophyly of the genera Pseudoperonospora, Hyaloperonospora and Perofascia each are strongly supported, but monophyly of Peronospora s. str. can neither be confirmed nor rejected. Within Peronospora s. str., basic relationships often remain unclear; however, some groups form highly supported monophyletic clades. Peronospora species parasitising the same host families or orders are only partly resolved as monophyletic, indicating frequent host-jumping also between distantly related host families. All species inhabiting flowers of different host families form a strongly supported monophyletic group.
S1084	O. Blanco;A. Crespo;P. K. Divakar;T. L. Esslinger;H. T. Lumbsch	2004	Melanelixia and Melanohalea, two new genera segregated from Melanelia (Parmeliaceae) based on molecular and morphological data	Molecular Ecology							Generic concepts in the parmelioid lichens have been discussed intensively over the past three decades without reaching a broad consensus. We have now employed molecular data from three genes to provide a basis for a revised generic concept of the parmelioid lichens containing Xanthoparmelia-type lichenan. The phylogeny of the parmelioid lichens containing Xanthoparmelia-type lichenan was reconstructed using a com-bined Bayesian analysis of nuclear ITS, LSU rDNA and mitochondrial SSU rDNA sequences. 181 new partial sequences of 55 taxa were generated and 10 sequences were downloaded from GenBank. Our results indicate that the lichens containing Xanthoparmelia-type lichenan form a monophyletic group. However, the segregates proposed earlier do not form distinct clades within the group. Alternative hypotheses of monophyletic Karoowia and Neofuscelia that are not nested within Xanthoparmelia were rejected with our data set. Consequently, these two genera are reduced to synonymy under Xanthoparmelia. Xanthomaculina convoluta also belongs to Xanthoparmelia. Since we were unable to study the umbilicate type species of Xanthomaculina, we refrain from synomyzing the genus with Xanthoparmelia. The synonymy of Chondropsis and Paraparmelia under Xanthoparmelia already proposed is supported. The revised and enlarged genus Xanthoparmelia includes species that have cell walls with Xanthoparmelia-type lichenan, a palisade plectenchyma with a pored epicortex, lack pseudocyphellae, with usually simple rhizines, generally bifusiform conidia and medullary chemical diversity. Ten new names are proposed, and 144 new combinations are made.
S1083	U. Eberhardt;A. Verbeken	2004	Sequestrate Lactarius species from tropical Africa: L. angiocarpus nov. sp. and L. dolichocaulis nov. comb	Molecular Ecology							Lactarius angiocarpus Verbeken & Eberhardt is described from miombo woodlands in Zambia. It is the third sequestrate representative of the Russulaceae described from tropical Africa. Morphological characters and DNA sequence data support its placement in the genus Lactarius, subgenus Plinthogali. Molecular kinship analyses confirm a multiple origin of sequestrate Russulaceae spp. As none of the previously sequenced sequestrate Russulaceae spp. has been assigned to the Plinthogali clade, the placement of L. angiocarpus indicates an additional point of origin of derivative sporocarp types within the Russulaceae. Within the same subgenus, another tropical African sequestrate species, Lactarius dolichocaulis (Pegler) Verbeken & Eberhardt comb. nov., is proposed.
S1058	P. Inderbitzin;S. R. Lim;B. Volkmann-Kohlmeyer;J. Kohlmeyer;M. L. Berbee	2004	The phylogenetic position of Spathulospora based on DNA sequences from dried herbarium material	Molecular Ecology							The phylogenetic position of the marine ascomycete genus Spathulospora was investigated using partial SSU and LSU DNA sequences obtained from dried herbarium specimens. Spathulospora was represented by the two species S. adelpha and S. antarctica. Phylogenetic analyses using Bayesian, parsimony, and neighbor-joining algorithms on SSU and LSU data sets agreed with the placement of Spathulospora. Both Spathulospora species are each others closest relatives, and group within the Lulworthiales (Sordariomycetes, Ascomycota) with support in all analyses. Members of the morphologically similar insect parasites in the Laboulbeniomycetes are not closely related to Spathulospora. Despite several striking morphological differences between Spathulospora and Lulworthiales, an important shared morphological character was found that until now had not been recognized. Ascospores of Spathulospora and some members of the Lulworthiales have apical chambers containing mucus believed to be involved in ascospore attachment. A closest relative to Spathulospora could not be determined.
S1036	K. L. Ivors;K. J. Hayden;P. J. M. Bonants;D. M. Rizzo;M. Garbelotto	2004	AFLP and phylogenetic analyses of North American and European populations of Phytophthora ramorum	Molecular Ecology							The genetic structure within and between USA and European populations of the emerging phytopathogen Phytophthora ramorum was examined. Four primer combinations were used for amplified fragment length polymorphism (AFLP) fingerprinting of 67 USA isolates from California and Oregon, and 18 European isolates from Belgium, Germany, The Netherlands, Spain and the United Kingdom. In addition, three DNA regions (ITS, cox II, and nad 5) of additional Phytophthora species were amplified by polymerase chain reaction, sequenced, and analyzed to provide better phylogenetic understanding of P. ramorum within the genus Phytophthora. AFLP banding patterns indicate that the 85 isolates form two distinct lineages within a monophyletic group, distinct from the closely related outgroup species P. lateralis. With the exception of two isolates from an Oregon nursery, European and USA isolates clustered separately within individual clades. The AFLP profiles also indicate that a single clonal lineage dominates the North American population, while the European population consists of an array of mainly unique, closely related AFLP types. Sequences from the three DNA regions were identical among all P. ramorum isolates, and phylogenetic analysis indicates that P. ramorum is closely related to P. lateralis and P. hibernalis.
S1066	R. Kasanen;J. Hantula;M. E. Ostry;J. Pinon;T. Kurkela	2004	North American populations of Entoleuca mammata are genetically more variable than populations in Europe	Molecular Ecology							Entoleuca mammata (Hypoxylon mammatum) is a damaging pathogen of Populus tremuloides and P. grandidentata in North America and P. tremula in Europe where the fungus occurs only sporadically in alpine regions and Scandinavia. It has been hypothesized that E. mammata was introduced to Europe from North America. In this study, E. mammata isolates collected from Europe and North America were compared by a sequence analysis of two DNA markers derived from DNA fingerprints. The objective of the study was to elucidate the relationship between North American and European E. mammata populations by testing two hypotheses: i) North American and European isolates are conspecific. ii) The fungus was introduced between continents causing both a founder effect and a genetic bottleneck. North American populations were found to be more polymorphic, but no major phylogenetic differences between fungal isolates collected from different continents were found. This result combined with the historical observations of the disease in Europe implies that E. mammata was introduced to Europe several centuries ago.
S1019	M. Lutz;R. Bauer;D. Begerow;F. Oberwinkler	2004	Tuberculina - Thanatophytum/Rhizoctonia crocorum - Helicobasidium: A unique mycoparasitic-phytoparasitic life strategy	Molecular Ecology							Tuberculina species are mitosporic parasites of rust fungi. Phylogenetically they belong to the Urediniomycetidae, therefore being closely related to their rust fungal hosts. We reveal by means of molecular analyses, ultrastructural and morphological features, observations in the field, and infection experiments that species of the genus Tuberculina and the violet root rot (Helicobasidium/Rhizoctonia crocorum) are stages of the life cycle of one holomorph. This opens up new perspectives on parasitic life strategies as the resulting life cycle is based on interkingdom host jumping between rusts and spermatophytes. In addition, we point at the consequences for any practical application dealing with Helicobasidium as an economically important plant pathogen and Tuberculina as a biological agent in rust control.
S1076	A. Menkis;J. Allmer;R. Vasiliauskas;V. Lygis;J. Stenlid;R. Finlay	2004	Ecology and molecular characterization of dark septate fungi from roots, living stems, coarse and fine woody debris	Molecular Ecology							The aim of the present work was to determine the identity and molecular relationships between 127 strains of dark septate (DS) fungi isolated from healthy root tips, decayed coarse roots, live healthy-looking stems, coarse (stumps, snags and logs) and fine (tree branches and tops) woody debris in temperate-boreal forests in Sweden and Lithuania. Sequence analysis of internal transcribed spacers of ribosomal DNA (ITS rDNA) was used to identify the fungi. In a neighbour-joining similarity tree, all sequences were grouped into five distinct clusters. Within each of these, ITS rDNA sequence variation consisted of 2-18 nucleotides, corresponding to 1-3 % of their total length. The four least variable clusters were supported with high bootstrap values of 86-100%. Comparisons with the sequences in the GenBank database showed that all our strains had a 95-100% homology with identified Phialocephala species, and they were thus assigned to this genus. The representatives of two clusters were identified, as P. fortinii and P. dimorphospora. The representatives of three remaining clusters were defined as Phialocephala sp. 35, Phialocephala sp. 6 and Phialocephala sp. 18. Within each of these clusters ITS rDNA sequence uniformity was higher than that observed within P. fortinii and P. dimorphospora. Consequently, their clusters were most discrete, supported with the bootstrap values of 100%. Genetic variation in the five distinguished Phialocephala species and their possible ecological roles is discussed. Phialocephala sp. 6 was confined to healthy root tips of conifers. P. dimorphospora was only associated with dead woody tissue of P. abies. P. fortinii, Phialocephala sp. 18 and sp. 35 were isolated from both dead and living conifers and Betula pendula. In conclusion, the present study revealed the ability of fungi from the genus Phialocephala to colonise and persist in live and dead trees under strikingly different ecological conditions.
S1296	C. D. Moon;K. D. Craven;A. Leuchtmann;S. L. Clement;C. L. Schardl	2004	Prevalence of interspecific hybrids amongst asexual fungal endophytes of grasses	Molecular Ecology	13		1455-1467				Epichloe endophytes are fungal symbionts of grasses that span a continuum including asexual mutualists that are vertically transmitted, obligately sexual pathogens that are horizontally transmitted, and mixed-strategy symbionts with both mutualistic and pathogenic capabilities. Here we show that processes of genome evolution differ markedly for the different symbiont types. Genetic and phylogenetic analysis was conducted of a broad taxonomic, ecological and geographical sample of sexual and asexual isolates, in which were identified and sequenced alleles of genes for alpha-tubulin (tub2) and translation elongation factor 1-a (tef1), and microsatellite alleles were identified by length polymorphisms. The majority of asexual isolates had two or three alleles of most loci, but every sexual isolate had only single alleles for each locus. Phylogenetic analysis of tub2 and tef1 indicated that in all instances of multiple alleles in an isolate, the alleles were derived from different sexual species. It is concluded that, whereas horizontally transmissible species had haploid genomes and speciation occurred cladistically, most of the strictly seedborne mutualists were interspecific hybrids with heteroploid (aneuploid or polyploid) genomes. Furthermore, the phylogenetic evidence indicated that, in at least some instances, hybridization followed rather than caused evolution of the strictly seedborne habit. Therefore, the abundance of hybrid species among grass endophytes, and their prevalence in many host populations suggests a selective advantage of hybridization for the mutualistic endophytes.
S1026	S. W. Peterson	2004	Multilocus DNA sequence analysis shows that Penicillium biourgeianum Zaleski is a distinct species closely related to P. brevicompactum and P. olsonii	Molecular Ecology							Penicillium brevicompactum and other isolates with the compact, complex conidiogenous apparatus typical of the species were sequenced in one ribosomal and two protein coding regions. The aligned DNA sequences were analyzed by maximum parsimony and the data from different loci were tested for compatibility using the partition homogeneity test. Analysis of each of the three loci revealed three clades corresponding to Penicillium brevicompactum, P. olsonii and Penicillium biourgeianum. Using the phylogenetic species concept and the genetic isolation of the clades, we can list P. hagemi Zaleski, P. patrismei Zaleski, P. stoloniferum Thom, and P. griseobrunneum Dierckx as synonyms of P. brevicompactum. Penicillium volgaense Beljakova & Milko is a synonym of Penicillium olsonii. Penicillium biourgeianum Zaleski is a distinct species closely related to P. brevicompactum and P. olsonii. Phenotypic distinctions between the species are mostly based on colony characteristics such as colour. Penicillium bialowiezenze Zaleski, often treated as a synonym of P. brevicompactum is most closely related to P. polonicum Zaleski.
S1016	A. Urban;I. Neuner-Plattner;I. Krisai-Greilhuber;K. Haselwandter	2004	Geodendron, a new form genus to accomodate anamorphs linked to the genus Tuber	Molecular Ecology							Geodendron araucarioides gen. et sp. nov. and Geodendron hydrophobum sp. nov., two new terricolous anamorphs linked to the genus Tuber according to molecular phylogenetic analysis are described. Nuclear ribosomal DNA (nrDNA) sequences including the ITS regions and the D1 and D2 domains of the LSU identify the anamorphs as nested within the species group of minor white truffles. Geodendron araucarioides is strictly related to Tuber borchii, Geodendron hydrophobum is linked to Tuber oligospermum. The affinity of the two new Geodendron anamorphs to the genus Tuber is confirmed by the comparative analysis of five Geodendron collections from four sampling sites. Ectomycorrhizae with characteristic features of Tuber borchii ectomycorrhizae were found in the soil volume collected with one sample of Geodendron araucarioides. A nrDNA sequence amplified from these ectomycorrhizae is identical with the corresponding anamorph sequence, suggesting an ectomycorrhizal status of Geodendron araucarioides. The possible role of the newly discovered anamorphs in the Tuber life cycle and the potential significance of anamorphs for the propagation of ectomycorrhizal fungi are discussed.
S1102	H. Voglmayr;A. Riethmuller;M. Gker;M. Weifl;F. Oberwinkler	2004	Phylogenetic relationships of Plasmopara, Bremia and other genera of downy mildew fungi with pyriform haustoria based on Bayesian analysis of partial LSU rDNA sequence data	Molecular Ecology	108						Bayesian and maximum parsimony phylogenetic analyses of 92 collections of the genera Basidiophora, Bremia, Paraperonospora, Phytophthora and Plasmopara were performed using nuclear large subunit ribosomal DNA sequences containing the D1 and D2 regions. In the Bayesian tree, two main clades were apparent: one clade containing Plasmopara pygmaea s. l., Pl. sphaerosperma, Basidiophora, Bremia and Paraperonospora, and a clade containing all other Plasmopara species. Plasmopara is shown to be polyphyletic, and Pl. sphaerosperma is transferred to a new genus, Protobremia, for which also the oospore characteristics are described. Within the core Plasmopara clade, all collections originating from the same host family except from Asteraceae and Geraniaceae formed monophyletic clades; however, higher-level phylogenetic relationships lack significant branch support. A sister group relationship of Pl. sphaerosperma with Bremia lactucae is highly supported. Within Bremia lactucae s. l., three distinct clades are evident, which only partly conform to the published host specificity groups. All species of the genera Basidiophora, Bremia, Paraperonospora and Plasmopara included in the present study were investigated for haustorial morphology, and all had ellipsoid to pyriform haustoria, which are regarded as a diagnostic synapomorphy of the whole clade. Aspects of coevolution and cospeciation within the downy mildews with ellipsoid to pyriform haustoria are briefly discussed.
S1060	A. D. Yoder;Z. Yang	2004	Divergence dates for Malagasy lemurs estimated from multiple gene loci: geological and evolutionary context	Molecular Ecology	13		757-773				The lemurs of Madagascar are a unique radiation of primates that show an extraordinary diversity of lifestyles, morphologies, and behaviors. Yet, very little is known about the relative antiquity of lemuriform clades due to the lack of terrestrial fossils for the Tertiary of Madagascar. Here, we employ a Bayesian method to estimate divergence dates within the lemuriform radiation, using several unlinked gene loci and multiple fossil calibrations outside of the lemuriform clade. Two mitochondrial genes (cytochrome oxidase II and cytochrome b), two nuclear introns (transthyretin intron 1 and von Willebrand factor gene intron 11), and one nuclear exon (interphotoreceptor retinoid binding protein, exon 1) are used in separate and combined analyses. The genes differ in taxon sampling and evolutionary characteristics but produce congruent date estimates. Credibility intervals narrow considerably in combined analyses relative to separate analyses due to the increased amount of data. We also test the relative effects of multiple versus single calibration points, finding that when only single calibration points are employed, divergence dates are systematically underestimated. For the mtDNA data set, we investigate the effects of sampling density within the mouse lemur radiation (genus Microcebus). When only two representative species are included, estimated dates throughout the phylogeny are more recent than with the complete-species sample, with basal nodes less affected than recent nodes. The difference appears to be due to the manner in which priors on node ages are constructed in the two analyses. In nearly all analyses, the age of the lemuriform clade is estimated to be approximately 62 - 65 Ma, with initial radiation of mouse lemurs and true lemurs (genus Eulemur) occurring approximately 8 ñ 12 Ma. The antiquity of the mouse lemur radiation is surprising given the near uniform morphology among species. Moreover, the observation that mouse lemurs and true lemurs are of similar ages suggests discrepancies in rates of morphological, behavioral, and physiological evolution in the two clades, particularly with regard to characteristics of sexual signaling. These differences appear to correlate with the nocturnal versus diurnal lifestyles, respectively, of these two primate groups.
S1352	I. G. Alsos;T. Engelskjøn;L. Gielly;P. Taberlet;C. Brochmann	2005	Impact of ice ages on circumpolar molecular diversity: insight from an ecological key species	Molecular Ecology	14		2739-2753				We address the impact of the ice age cycles on intraspecific cpDNA diversity, for the first time on the full circumboreal-circumarctic scale. The bird-dispersed bog bilberry (or arctic blueberry, Vaccinium uliginosum) is a key component of northern ecosystems and is here used to assess diversity in previously glaciated versus unglaciated areas and the importance of Beringia as a refugium and source for interglacial expansion. Eighteen chloroplast DNA haplotypes were observed in and among 122 populations, grouping into three main lineages which probably diverged before, and thus were affected more or less independently by, all major glaciations. The boreal 'Amphi-Atlantic Lineage' included one haplotype occurring throughout Northern Europe and one occurring in eastern North America, suggesting expansion from at least two bottlenecked, glacial refugium populations. The boreal 'Beringian Lineage' included seven haplotypes restricted to Beringia and the Pacific coast of USA. The 'Arctic-Alpine Lineage' lineage included nine haplotypes, one of them fully circumpolar. This lineage was unexpectedly diverse, also in previously glaciated areas, suggesting that it thrived on the vast tundras during the ice ages and recolonized deglaciated terrain over long distances. Its largest area of persistence during glaciations was probably situated in the north, stretching from Beringia and far into Eurasia, and it probably also survived the last glaciation in southern mountain ranges. Although Beringia apparently was important for the initial divergence and expansion of Vaccinium uliginosum as well as for continuous survival of both the Beringian and Arctic-Alpine lineages during all ice ages, this region played a minor role as a source for later interglacial expansions.
S1303	D. J. Taylor;H. L. Sprenger;S. Ishida	2005	Geographic and phylogenetic evidence for dispersed nuclear introgression in a daphniid with sexual propagules	Molecular Ecology	14		525-537				The role of among-species gene flow in eukaryotic evolution remains controversial. Putative hybrid lineages are common in water fleas, but their ecological success is often associated with polyploidy and the production of asexual propagules. Advanced hybrid lineages with sexual propagules are expected to be geographically restricted because their successful dispersal is contingent on overcoming fertility complications, assimilation by parent taxa, and competition with parent taxa. Here we provide evidence that a diploid lineage of Daphnia has been formed by introgression between distantly related species and attained a broad distribution (Nearctic) despite its requirement for sexual propagules. The evidence is based on geographical discordance, phylogenetic discordance, recombinant genotypes and additive genotypes of the nuclear internal transcribed spacer regions (ITS) and mitochondrial DNA. Additive genotypes also provided evidence of hybridization between introduced European Daphnia and North American Daphnia . We argue that the unique biology of Holarctic lacustrine water fleas and the spatial separation of lineages during Pleistocene glaciation have promoted hybridization and its evolutionary consequences.
S1648	J. Trusty;R. Olmstead;A. Santos-Guerra;S. Fontinha;J. Francisco-Ortega	2005	Molecular phylogenetics of the Macaronesian-endemic genus Bystgropogon (Lamiaceae): palaeoislands, ecological shifts, and interisland colonizations	Molecular Ecology	14	4	1177-1189	10.1111/j.1365-294X.2005.02487.x			A molecular phylogenetic study of the Macaronesian genus Bystropogon (Lamiaceae) is presented. We performed a cladistic analysis of nucleotide sequences of the Internal Transcribed Spacers of the nuclear ribosomal DNA and of the trnL gene and trnL-trnF intergenic spacer of the chloroplast DNA. Non-functional ITS copies were found in B. canariensis var. smithianus from the islands of La Palma and La Gomera. Bystropogon odoratissimus is the only species endemic to the Canary Islands that occurs in the three paleoislands of Tenerife. This species is not part of a stem-based group of Bystropogon and we suggest that it has a recent origin. This phylogenetic pattern is followed by the majority of species endemic to the paleoislands of Tenerife. The two taxonomic sections currently recognized in Bystropogon form two distinct monophyletic groups in our molecular phylogeny. Taxa belonging to the section Bystropogon clade show interisland colonization limited to the Canary Island archipelago with ecological shifts among three ecological zones. Taxa from the section Canariense clade show interisland colonization both within the Canary Islands and between the Canary Islands and Madeira. Speciation events within this clade are limited to the laurel forest ecological zone. The genus has followed a colonization route from the Canaries towards Madeira, this route has also been followed by at least five other plant genera with species endemic to Macaronesia. Major incongruences were found between the current infra-sectional classification and the molecular phylogeny because the varieties of B. origanifolius and B. canariensis do not form two monophyletic groups
S1676	C. J. Dixon;P. Schönswetter;G. M. Schneeweiss	2007	Traces of ancient range shifts in a mountain plant group (Androsace halleri complex, Primulaceae)	Molecular Ecology							Phylogeographic studies frequently detect range shifts, both expansions (including long distance dispersal) and contractions (including vicariance), in the studied taxa. These processes are usually inferred from the patterns and distribution of genetic variation, with the potential pitfall that different historical processes may result in similar genetic patterns. Using a combination of DNA sequence data from the plastid genome, AFLP fingerprinting, and rigorous phylogenetic and coalescence-based hypothesis testing, we show that Androsace halleri (currently distributed disjunctly in the NWˆIberian Cordillera Cantabrica, the eastern Pyrenees, and the French Massif Central and Vosges), or its ancestor, was once more widely distributed in the Pyrenees. While there, it hybridised with A. laggeri and A. pyrenaica, both of which are currently allopatric with A. halleri. The common ancestor of A. halleri and the north Iberian local endemic A. rioxana probably existed in the north Iberian mountain ranges with subsequent range expansion (to the French mountain ranges of the Massif Central and the Vosges) and allopatric speciation (A. rioxana, A. halleri in the eastern Pyrenees, A. halleri elsewhere). We have thus been able to use the reticulate evolution in this species group to help elucidate its phylogeographic history, including evidence of range contraction.
S1845	A. D. Leaché;D. G. Mulcahy	2007	Phylogeny, divergence times, and species limits of spiny lizards (Sceloporus magister species group) in western North America deserts and Baja California	Molecular Ecology							The broad distribution of the Sceloporus magister species group (squamata: phrynosomatidae) throughout western North America provides an appropriate model for testing biogeographic hypotheses explaining the timing and origins of diversity across mainland deserts and the Baja California Peninsula. We inferred concordant phylogenetic trees describing the higher-level relationships within the magister group using 1.6 kb of mtDNA and 1.7 kb of nuclear data. These data provide strong support for the parallel divergence of lineages endemic to the Baja California Peninsula (S. zosteromus and the orcutti complex) in the form of two sequential divergence events at the base of the magister group phylogeny. A relaxed phylogenetic analysis of the mtDNA data using one fossil and one biogeographic constraint provides a chronology of these divergence events and evidence that further diversification within the Baja California clades occurred simultaneously, although patterns of geographic variation and speciation differ. We resolved four major phylogeographic clades within S. magister that 1) provide a novel phylogenetic placement of the Chihuahuan Desert populations sister to the Mojave Desert, 2) illustrate a mixed history for the Colorado Plateau that includes Mojave and Sonoran Desert components, and 3) identify an area of overlap between the Mojave and Sonoran Desert clades near Yuma, Arizona. Estimates of bi-directional migration rates among populations of S. magister using four nuclear loci support strong asymmetries in gene flow among the major mtDNA clades. Based on the non-exclusivity of mtDNA haplotypes, nuclear gene flow among populations, and wide zones of phenotypic intergradation, S. magister appears to represent a single geographically variable and widespread species.
S2238	C. P. Jones;J. B. Johnson	2008	Phylogeography of the livebearer Xenophallus umbratilis (Teleostei: Poeciliidae): glacial cycles and sea level change predict diversification of a freshwater tropical fish	Molecular Ecology							The biogeography of Central America is viewed as a classic case study in understanding the impact of vicariant events on patterns of biotic dispersal. While many biogeographers have focused on community composition and geographic limits of species at broad scales across Central America, much less work has focused on post-colonization diversification patterns at finer scales. The livebearing freshwater fish Xenophallus umbratilis presents an ideal system for determining the impact of recent earth history events on biodiversity in northern Costa Rica. Here, we test the hypotheses that marine inundation of the San Carlos and Northern Limón basins during the Miocene has caused genetic fragmentation among X. umbratilis populations, despite contemporary freshwater connections. To test this idea, we collected mitochondrial (cytb) 162 individuals taken from 27 localities across northern Costa Rica. We employed a variety of analytical approaches, including: maximum parsimony (MP) and maximum likelihood (ML), analysis of molecular variance (AMOVA), and demographic analysis of population size through time. We found four major clades within X. umbratilis, each geographically isolated with no shared haplotypes across drainages. Oddly, clades that occupy adjacent drainages are not always sister taxa in the phylogeny, suggesting that colonization in this species is more complex than a simple model of isolation by distance. All our results are consistent with the hypothesis that changes in sea level associated with glacial eustatic cycles have had an important effect in shaping diversification patterns in this species.
S2178	D. J. Thornhill;A. R. Mahon;J. L. Norenburg;K. M. Halanych	2008	Open-ocean barriers to dispersal: a test case with the Antarctic Polar Front and the ribbon worm Parborlasia corrugatus (Nemertea: Lineidae)	Molecular Ecology							Open-ocean environments provide few obvious barriers to the dispersal of marine organisms. Major currents and/or environmental gradients potentially impede gene flow. One system hypothesized to form an open-ocean dispersal barrier is the Antarctic Circumpolar Current (ACC), an area characterized by marked temperature change, deep water, and the high flow Antarctic Polar Front (APF). Despite these potential isolating factors, several invertebrate species occur in both regions, including the broadcast-spawning nemertean worm Parborlasia corrugatus. To empirically test for the presence of an open-ocean dispersal barrier, we sampled P. corrugatus and other nemerteans from southern South America, Antarctica, and the sub-Antarctic islands. Diversity was assessed by analyzing mitochondrial 16S rRNA and cytochrome c oxidase subunit I (COI) sequence data with Bayesian inference and TCS haplotype network analysis. Appropriate neutrality tests were also employed. Although our results indicate a single well-mixed lineage in Antarctica and the sub-Antarctic, no evidence for recent gene flow was detected between this population and South American P. corrugatus. Thus, even though P. corrugatus can disperse over large geographic distances, physical oceanographic barriers (i.e., ACC and APF) between continents have likely restricted dispersal over evolutionary time. Genetic distances and haplotype network analysis between South American and Antarctic/sub-Antarctic P. corrugatus suggest that these two populations are possibly two cryptic species. Furthermore, no molecular or morphological evidence was found to support the described congeneric species P. fueguina or P. landrumae, calling into question the legitimacy of these nominal taxa.
S2222	F. P. Werneck;L. G. Giugliano;R. G. Collevatti;G. R. Colli	2008	Phylogeny, biogeography and evolution of clutch size in South American lizards of the genus Kentropyx (Squamata: Teiidae)	Molecular Ecology							The lizard genus Kentropyx (Squamata: Teiidae)comprises nine species, which have been placed in three species groups (calcarata group, associated to forests ecosystems; paulensis and striata groups, associated to open ecosystems). We reconstructed phylogenetic relationships of Kentropyx based on morphology (pholidosis and coloration) and mitochondrial DNA data (12S and 16S), using maximum parsimony and Bayesian methods, and evaluated biogeographic scenarios based on ancestral areas analyses and molecular dating by Bayesian methods. Additionally, we tested the life-history hypothesis that species of Kentropyx inhabiting open ecosystems (under seasonal environments) produce larger clutches with smaller eggs and that species inhabiting forest ecosystems (under aseasonal conditions) produce clutches with fewer and larger eggs, using Stearns‚ phylogenetic-subtraction method and canonical phylogenetic ordination to take in to account the effects of phylogeny. Our results showed that Kentropyx comprises three monophyletic groups, with K. striata occupying a basal position in opposition to previous suggestions of relationships. Additionally, Bayesian analysis of divergence time showed that Kentropyx may have originated at the Tertiary (Eocene/Oligocene) and the ŒPleistocene Refuge Hypothesis‚ may not explain the species diversification. Based on ancestral reconstruction and molecular dating, we argued that a savanna ancestor is more likely and that historical events during the Tertiary of South America promoted the differentiation of the genus, coupled with recent Quaternary events that were important as dispersion routes and for the diversification at populational levels. Clutch size and egg volume were not significantly different between major clades and ecosystems of occurrence, even accounting for the phylogenetic effects. Finally, we argue that phylogenetic constraints and phylogenetic inertia might be playing essential roles in life history evolution of Kentropyx.
S2055	E. Zarza;V. H. Reynoso;B. C. Emerson	2008	Diversification in the northern neotropics: Mitochondrial and nuclear DNA phylogeography of the iguana Ctenosaura pectinata, and related species	Molecular Ecology							While Quaternary climatic changes are considered by some to have been a major factor promoting speciation within the neotropics, others suggest that much of the neotropical species diversity originated before the Pleistocene. Using mitochondrial and nuclear sequence data, we evaluate the relative importance of Pleistocene and pre-Pleistocene events within the evolutionary history of the Mexican iguana Ctenosaura pectinata, and related species. Results support the existence of cryptic lineages with strong mitochondrial divergence (>4%) among them. Some of these lineages form zones of secondary contact, with one of them hybridizing with C. hemilopha. Evolutionary network analyses reveal the oldest populations of C. pectinata to be those of the northern and southern Mexican coastal regions. Inland and mid-latitudinal coastal populations are younger in age as a consequence of a history of local extinction within these regions followed by re-colonization. Estimated divergence times suggest that C. pectinata originated during the Pliocene, whereas geographically distinct mtDNA lineages first started to diverge during the Pliocene, with subsequent divergence continuing through the Pleistocene. Our results highlight the influence of both Pliocene and Pleistocene events in shaping the geographic distribution of genetic variation within neotropical lowland organisms. Areas of high genetic diversity in southern Mexico were detected, this finding plus the high levels of genetic diversity within C. pectinata, have implications for the conservation of this threatened species.
S2266	N. G. Wilson;M. Schroedl;K. M. Halanych	2009	Ocean barriers and glaciation: evidence for explosive radiation of mitochondrial lineages in the Antarctic sea slug Doris kerguelenensis (Mollusca, Nudibranchia)	Molecular Ecology	18	5	965-984	10.1111/j.1365-294X.2008.04071.x			Strong currents and deep passages of water can be barriers for larval dispersal of continental marine animals, but potential effects on direct developers are under-investigated. We examined the genetic structure of Doris kerguelenensis, a directly-developing sea slug that occurs across the Drake Passage, the body of water separating Antarctica from South America. We found deep mitochondrial divergences within populations on both sides of the Drake Passage, and South American animals formed multiple sister-group relationships with Antarctic animals. A generalised molecular clock suggested these trans-Drake pairs diverged during the Pliocene-Pleistocene, after the formation of the Drake Passage. Statistical parsimony methods recovered 29 separate haplotype networks (many sympatric) that likely correlate with allopatric events caused by repeated glacial cycles. Data from16S was congruent but more conserved than COI, and the estimated ancestral 16S haplotype was widespread. The marked difference in the substitution rates between these two mitochondrial genes results in different estimates of connectivity. Demographic analyses on networks revealed some evidence for selection and expanding populations. Contrasting with the Northern Hemisphere, glaciation in Antarctica appears to have increased rather than reduced genetic diversity. This suggests orbitally-forced range dynamics based on Northern Hemisphere phylogeography do not hold for Antarctica. The diverse lineages found in D. kerguelenensis point toward a recent, explosive radiation, likely reflecting multiple refuges during glaciation events, combined with limited subsequent dispersal. Whether recognised as cryptic species or not, genetic diversity in Antarctic marine invertebrates appears higher than expected from morphological analyses, and supports the Antarctic biodiversity pump phenomenon.
S2327	M. Virgilio;C. Fauvelot;F. Costantini;M. Abbiati;T. Backeljau	2009	Phylogeography of the common ragworm Hediste diversicolor (Polychaeta: Nereididae) reveals cryptic diversity and multiple colonisation events across its distribution	Molecular Ecology	18	9	1980-1994	10.1111/j.1365-294X.2009.04170.x			Previous studies on the common ragworm Hediste diversicolor (Polychaeta: Nereididae) revealed a marked genetic fragmentation across its distribution and the occurrence of sibling taxa in the Baltic Sea. These results suggested that the phylogeographic patterns of H. diversicolor could reflect interactions between cryptic differentiation and multiple colonisation events. This study aims to describe the large scale genetic structuring of H. diversicolor and to trace the phylogeographic origins of the genetic types described in the Baltic Sea. Samples of H. diversicolor (2 < n < 28) were collected at 16 locations across the NE Atlantic coasts of Europe and Morocco and in the Mediterranean, Black and Caspian Seas and sequenced at two mitochondrial gene fragments (COI and cytb, 345 and 290 bp, respectively). Bayesian analyses revealed deep phylogeographic splits yielding three main clades corresponding to populations a) from the NE Atlantic coasts (from Germany to Morocco) and from part of the Western Mediterranean, b) from the Mediterranean Sea and c) from the Black and Caspian Seas. These clades are further divided in well supported subclades including populations from different regions of NE Atlantic and Mediterranean (i.e. Portugal/Morocco, Western Mediterranean, Adriatic Sea). The Baltic Sea comprises three sympatric lineages sharing a common evolutionary history with populations from NE Atlantic, Western Mediterranean and Black/Caspian Seas, respectively. Hence, the current patterns of genetic structuring of H. diversicolor appear the result of allopatric isolation, multiple colonisation events and possible adaptation to local environmental conditions.
S2498	P. Q. Spinks;R. C. Thomson;H. B. Shaffer	2009	Nuclear gene phylogeography reveals the historical legacy of an ancient inland sea on lineages of the western pond turtle, Emys marmorata in California	Molecular Ecology	19	3	542-556	10.1111/j.1365-294X.2009.04451.x			The historical biogeography of California s taxa has been the focus of extensive research effort. The western pond turtle (Emys marmorata), is an example of a wide-ranging taxon that spans several well-known California diversity hotspots. Using a dataset comprised of one mitochondrial and five nuclear loci, we elucidate the major biogeographic patterns of the western pond turtle across the California landscape. By employing a combination of phylogenetic and network-based approaches, we recovered a relatively ancient (~2-8 mya) north/south split among populations of this species and find an area of intergradation centered in the Central Coast Ranges of California. In addition, discordant mitochondrial/nuclear genetic patterns suggest subsequent gene flow from northern populations and from San Joaquin Valley populations into the Central Coast Ranges after the Pliocene-Pleistocene marine embayment of the Great Central Valley subsided. Our results emphasize the utility of nuclear DNA phylogeography for recovering the impact of relatively ancient biogeographic events, and suggest that the Central Coast Ranges of California have played a major role in the geographic structuring of the western pond turtle, and possibly other co-distributed taxa.
S1814	J. Lindell;R. W. Murphy	2007	Simple identification of mitochondrial lineages in contact zones based on lineage-selective primers	Molecular Ecology Notes							A variety of research projects focus on genetic variation among and within maternal lineages as encompassed by mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA). While mtDNA often differs substantially between species, large differences may also be found within species. The evaluation of such divergent lineages, for example in intraspecific contact zones (hybrid zones), commonly involves sequencing numerous individuals. Large-scale sequencing is both expensive and labour-intensive. Based on sequences from 15 individuals, we devised a simple and quick PCR-assay for identification of divergent mtDNA lineages in a secondary contact zone of the side-blotched lizard (Uta stansburiana). The application uses lineage-selective primers to amplify a lineage diagnostic product, and is based on each group of mtDNA haplotypes being a monophyletic assemblage of haplotypes sharing the same maternal ancestry, deeply divergent from the other group. The assay was tested on a larger sample (n=147) of specimens from the contact zone, confirming its usefulness in quick and reliable identification of mtDNA lineages. This approach can be modified for other species, provided diagnostic lineage variation is available, and may also be performed in simple laboratory settings while conducting fieldwork.
S441	M. G. Harasewych;S. L. Adamkewicz;J. A. Blake;D. Saudek;T. Spriggs;C. J. Bult	1997	Phylogeny and relationships of pleurotomariid gastropods (Mollusca: Gastropoda): An assessment based on partial 18S rDNA and cytochrome c oxidase I sequences	Molecular Marine Biology and Biotechnology	6	1	1-20		http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/9116867		The phylogenetic position of the ancient family Pleurotomariidae within the Molluscan class Gastropoda, as well as the relationships of its Recent genera and species, were assessed using an iterative, two-gene (18S rDNA and cytochrome c oxidase I) approach to phylogeny reconstruction. In order to orient the Pleurotomariidae within Gastropoda, partial 18S rDNA sequences were determined for 7 pleurotomariid and 22 other gastropods that span the major groups within the class as well as for one cephalopod and two polyplacophorans, which serve as outgroups. Cladistic analyses of a sequence of approximately 450 base pairs (bp) near the 5' end of the 18S rDNA support the monophyly of the following higher gastropod taxa: Patellogastropoda, Vetigastropoda, Neritopsina, Apogastropoda, and its subclades Caenogastropoda and Heterobranchia. The 18S rDNA sequences and 579 bp of cytochrome c oxidase I (COI) analyzed separately and together, indicate that Pleurotomariidae are included within Vetigastropoda but comprise a clade that is the sister group to the other families referred to this order. Monophyly of the Pleurotomariidae is also supported by the unique presence of seven separate inserts (ranging in length from 1 to 68 bp) within the V2 variable region of the 18S RNA. Relationships of the genera and species within Pleurotomariidae are fully resolved using total molecular evidence consisting of partial sequences of 18S rDNA and COI and including data on length variation within the inserts.
S2x6x96c17c37c51	B. G. Baldwin	1992	Phylogenetic utility of the internal transcribed spacers of nuclear ribosomal DNA in plants: An example from the Compositae	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution	1	1	3-16				The internal transcribed spacer (ITS) region of 18-26S nuclear ribosomal DNA was sequenced in 12 representatives of the Compositae subtribe Madiinae and two outgroup species to assess its utility for phylogeny reconstruction. High sequence alignability and minimal length variation among ITS 1, 5.8S, and ITS 2 sequences facilitated determination of positional homology of nucleotide sites. In pairwise comparisons among Madiinae DNAs, sequence divergence at unambiguously aligned sites ranged from 0.4 to,19.2% of nucleotides in ITS 1 and from 0 to 12.9% of nucleotides in ITS 2. Phylogenetic relationships among ITS sequences of Hawaiian silversword alliance species (Argyroxiphium, Dubautia, and Wilkesia) and California tarweed taxa in Adenothamnus, Madia, Raillardella, and Raillardiopsis are highly concordant with a chloroplast DNA-based phylogeny of this group. Maximally parsimonious trees from ITS and chloroplast DNA data all suggest (a) origin of the monophyletic Hawaiian silversword alliance from a California tarweed ancestor, (b) closer relationship of the Hawaiian species to Madia and Raillardiopsis than to Adenothamnus or Raillardella, (c) paraphyly of Raillardiopsis, a segregate of Raillardella, and (d) closer relationship of Raillardiopsis to Madia and the silversword alliance than to Raillardella. These findings indicate that the ITS region in plants should be further explored as a promising source of nuclear phylogenetic markers.
S2x7x96c16c42c04	J. R. Manhart	1994	Phylogenetic analysis of green plant rbcL sequences	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution	3		114-127				DNA and derived amino acid sequences of the rbcL gene from selected photosynthetic bacteria, green algae, bryophytes, fern allies, ferns, and seed plants were used to construct phylogenetic trees using parsimony algorithms. Internal support of clades was determined by the bootstrap and decay indices. External support was judged by comparison of trees with previous morphological and molecular cladograms. Some clades on all the trees are supported both internally and externally, but all of the trees are characterized by unsupported relationships of the bryophytes and fern allies. Trees produced by analyses of all three DNA positions have the highest levels of internal support, but many clades are still not supported externally or internally. Analyses using only the first and second positions of the DNA sequences and derived amino acid sequences produced trees with odd groupings and low levels of internal support for most of the clades. These results indicate that rbcL sequences may be too divergent to test phylogenetic relationships among major groups of green plants. Additional problems with constructing phylogenetic trees from rbcL sequences may be caused by RNA editing, pseudogenes, unequal rates of evolution, and inadequate taxon sampling. Whether RNA editing is a problem can be determined by sequencing amplified RNAs from selected taxa. If pseudogenes are suspected, purified chloroplast DNA should be used for amplification. It may be beneficial to include more taxa in subsequent analyses, but there are indications that historical extinctions will prevent adequate sampling of some groups, such as the bryophytes and fern allies.
S242	D. P. Ohland;E. H. Harley;P. B. Best	1995	Systematics of Cetaceans Using Restriction Site Mapping of Mitochondrial DNA	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution	4	1	10-19	10.1006/mpev.1995.1002			Phylogenetic analysis of 14 cetacean species, including members from two baleen whale families and three toothed whale families, was undertaken using restriction site mapping of mitochondrial DNA and using cladistic and distance measures to infer phylogenies. The amount of between-taxa sequence divergence inferred from the data was lower than expected from the standard interpretation of the fossil record, but more conaiatent with aome recent estimates of sequence divergence in cetacean mitochondrial DNA or nuclear DNA. This implies either that the rate of molecular evolution of cetacean DNA is much lower than that of other mammalian orders or that the fossil record of cetaceans requires reinterpretation. The incompleteness of the cetacean fossil record precludes resolution of the paradox at the present time. However, this discrepancy could in part be attributed to the sampling error inherent in the reatriction aite mapping technique, as comparative studies using the complete mtDNA genome and restriction site data of the blue and fin whales (genus Balaenoptera) indicate that the restriction site maps underestimate sequence divergence by about 40%. In contrast to a recent atudy auggesting that toothed whales were paraphyletic, with the sperm whales being more closely related to the rorquals than to the other toothed whales, the restriction data tend to support the monophyly of the baleen and the toothed whales, a finding which is consistent with a recent molecular-based study and with morphological and paleontological data. Topologies of the subfamily and generic levels are generally consistent with morphologically based schemes.
S331	M. Schilthuizen;E. Gittenberger;A. P. Gultyaev	1995	Phylogenetic relationships inferred from the sequence and secondary structure of ITS1 rRNA in Albinaria and putative Isabellaria species (Gastropoda, Pulmonata, Clausiliidae)	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution	4	4	457-462	10.1006/mpev.1995.1042			An analysis of the ITSI sequence variation among five species of terrestrial pulmonate snails was performed to decide between two conflicting hypotheses concerning the phylogeny of these anatomically similar gastropods. It turned out that the so-called genus Isabellaria is a polyphyletic entity; the diagnostic, apomorphic structure of its clausilial apparatus, enabling a nearly complete obstruction of the shell aperture with the animal at rest, apparently evolved more than once from ancestors currently classified with the speciose genus Albinaria. The classification based on general shell shape and sculpture, and distributional patterns, turns out to be the natural one. This study also provides the first data on ITS1 sequences in gastropods. The recently published ITS1 sequence of another molluscan species, a bivalve, is quite different but similar in length to that of the snails.
S466	B. V. Pedersen	1996	A phylogenetic analysis of cuckoo bumblebees (Psithyrus, Lepeletier) and bumblebees (Bombus, Latreille) inferred from sequences of the mitochondrial gene cytochrome oxidase I	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution	5	2	289-297	10.1006/mpev.1996.0024			PCR amplification and direct sequencing of a 532-bp region of the mt CO-1 (cytochrome oxidase I) gene from five true bumblebee species and six cuckoo bumblebee species were performed. The sequences were then aligned to the corresponding sequence in the honey bee. Phylogenetic analyses based on parsimony and maximum likelihood indicate that the cuckoo bumblebees form a monophyletic group within the true bumblebees. The Bombus lucorum group (subgenus Bombus) falls out as the sister group to a clade comprising the cuckoo bumblebees and the remaining true bumblebees. A strong A+T bias (A+T = 75%) was recorded. Comparisons of all the sequences show a high-transversion bias (A <-> T) even among closely related species. The bias is most pronounced in third positions.
S6x22x97c14c38c41	K. M. Halanych;T. J. Robinson	1997	Phylogenetic relationships of cottontails (Sylvilagus, Lagomorpha): Congruence of 12S rDNA and cytogenetic data	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution	7	3	294-302	10.1006/mpev.1996.0403			The genus Sylvilagus, which comprises the New World cottontail rabbits, contains several commercially important as well as endangered (or threatened) species. Understanding the evolution of this group is pertinent to their management and conservation. The purpose of this study was to examine the evolutionary history of the cottontails using sequence data from the mitochondrial 12S rRNA gene. The 12S data provide a robust phylogeny which was supported under a variety of phylogenetic approaches and transition/transversion (Ti/Tv) weighting schemes. Stem and loop regions of the gene were analyzed separately and two different methods of estimating Ti/Tv ratios were employed. The phylogeny obtained was consistent with available cytogenetic information. The 12S data indicate that separate generic status for the pygmy rabbit, Brachylagus idahoensis, is warranted based on its phylogenetic position and sequence divergence values. Additionally, the taxa which are geographically adjacent are also phylogenetically closely related; for example the marsh rabbit, S. palustris, and the swamp rabbit, S. aquaticus, are sister taxa, as are the mountain cottontail, S. nuttallii, and desert cottontail, S. audubonii. This finding suggests that recent vicariance events might explain the diversification of several cottontail lineages.
S6x23x97c17c57c34	L. A. Lewis;B. D. Mishler;R. Vilgalys	1997	Phylogenetic relationships of the liverworts (Hepaticae), a basal embryophyte lineage, inferred from nucleotide sequence data of the chloroplast gene rbcL	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution	7	3	377-393	10.1006/mpev.1996.0395			Sequence data from the chloroplast-encoded gene, rbcL, were obtained for twenty-four liverworts, a basal group of embryophytes. Maximum likelihood and parsimony analyses of these data, along with data from other major green plant lineages, confirm hypotheses based on morphological data, such as the paraphyly of bryophytes, and the basal position of liverworts. Molecular data corroborate the deep separation between the complex thalloid and leafy/simple thalloid liverworts implied by morphological data, but the monophyly of liverworts could not be rejected. The effects of accounting for site-to-site rate heterogeneity in these data were examined using maximum likelihood methods. Comparison of trees obtained with and without rate heterogeneity showed that simply allowing for heterogeneity had a greater improvement on likelihood score than optimization of transition/transversion bias. Incorporation of site-to-site rate heterogeneity in the larger analysis, however, did not necessarily change which topology.
S3x10x98c09c42c47	M. J. Donoghue;S. Mathews	1998	Duplicate genes and the root of the angiosperms, with an example using phytochrome sequences	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution	9	3	489-500	10.1006/mpev.1998.0511			The root of the angiosperm tree has not yet been established. Major morphological and molecular differences between angiosperms and other seed plants have introduced ambiguities and possibly spurious results. Because it is unlikely that extant species more closely related to angiosperms will be discovered, and because relevant fossils will almost certainly not yield molecular data, the use of duplicate genes for rooting purposes may provide the best hope of a solution. Simultaneous analysis of the genes resulting from a gene duplication event along the branch subtending angiosperms would yield an unrooted network, wherein two congruent gene trees should be connected by a single branch. Under these circumstances the best rooted species tree is the one that corresponds to the two gene trees when the network is rooted along the connecting branch. In general, this approach can be viewed as choosing among rooted species trees by minimizing hypothesized events such as gene duplication, gene loss, lineage sorting, and lateral transfer. Of those gene families that are potentially relevant to the angiosperm problem, phytochrome genes warrant special attention. Phylogenetic analysis of a sample of complete phytochrome (PHY) sequences implies that an initial duplication event preceded (or occurred early within) the radiation of seed plants, and that each of the two resulting copies duplicated again. In one of these cases, leading to the PHYA and PHYC lineages, duplication appears to have occurred before the diversification of angiosperms. Duplicate gene trees are congruent in these broad analyses, but the sample of sequences is too limited to provide much insight into the rooting question. Preliminary analyses of partial PHYA and PHYC sequences from several presumably basal angiosperm lineages are promising, but more data are needed to critically evaluate the power of these genes to resolve the angiosperm radiation.
S357	S. A. Nadler;D. S. S. Hudspeth	1998	Ribosomal DNA and Phylogeny of the Ascaridoidea (Nemata: Secernentea): Implications for Morphological Evolution and Classification	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution	10	2	221-236	10.1006/mpev.1998.0514			Nematodes of the superfamily Ascaridoidea are parasites of the alimentary tract of vertebrates and include species that are of medical and economic importance. Existing evolutionary hypotheses for these organisms have frequently been based on interpretation of one or few key structural or life history features. We used nuclear-encoded small (1,764 characters) and large subunit (757 characters) ribosomal DNA sequences to estimate the phylogeny of representative taxa from this superfamily. Trees inferred by maximum parsimony and maximum likelihood methods strongly support clades that are primarily consistent with one recent classification of the group. In contrast, most previously proposed phylogenetic hypotheses were significantly worse when compared to the maximum likelihood tree by a statistical method. Hypotheses for the evolution of morphological and life history characters were explored by parsimony mapping these features on several tree topologies, including optimal molecular trees and alternative topologies reflecting traditional expectations deemed not worse in statistical tests. The results identify some consistent putative shared-derived morphological features, but also strongly suggest that some key features emphasized by previous workers represent ancestral states or highly homoplastic characters.
S374	R. D. M. Page;P. L. M. Lee;S. A. Becher;R. Griffiths;D. H. Clayton	1998	A different tempo of mitochondrial DNA evolution in birds and their parasitic lice	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution	9	2	276-293	10.1006/mpev.1997.0458			A phylogeny for the lice (Insecta: Phthiraptera: genus Dennyus) parasitic on swiftlets (Aves: Collocalliinae) was constructed based on mitochondrial cytochrome b DNA sequences. This phylogeny is congruent with previous phenetic analyses of morphometric data for the lice. Comparison with a previously obtained phylogeny for the hosts indicates some degree of cospeciation. These cospeciation events are used to compare relative rates of evolution in the birds and their lice for the same segment of the cytochrome b gene. Cytochrome b is evolving 2-3 times more rapidly in lice than in birds, and louse cytochrome b is highly divergent compared to most other insects. Although generation time has been suggested as an explanation for the disparity in evolutionary rates between lice and their hosts, we suggest that the small effective population sizes of lice coupled with founder events occurring during transmission to new host individuals may be an important factor.
S368	K. Zehethofer;C. Sturmbauer	1998	Phylogenetic relationships of central European wolf spiders (Araneae : Lycosidae) inferred from 12S ribosomal DNA sequences	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution	10	3	391-398	10.1006/mpev.1998.0536			We have analyzed a sequence dataset of a portion of mitochondrial 12S rRNA gene of the ribosomal small subunit for 27 species of the family Lycosidae (wolf spiders) from Central Europe, belonging to six genera (Alopecosa, Arctosa, Pardosa, Pirata, Trochosa, and Xerolycosa) and four subfamilies (Evippinae, Lycosinae, Pardosinae and Venoniinae). Phylogenetic analyses were performed in two steps and corroborate the monophyly of all the genera analyzed with strong bootstrap support. In the first step focusing on the most ancestral splits the genus Pirata consistently emerged as the most ancestral branch, followed by the two genera Arctosa and Xerolycosa, with conflicting branching order, however. The second step of analysis placed Xerolycosa more ancestral than Arctosa. Arctosa appeared as sister group to the genera Alopecosa, Trochosa, and Pardosa. The palearctic genus Xerolycosa was not yet included in previous studies derived from morphological characters, but its placement based on mtDNA sequences is in good agreement to that according to current diagnostic morphological features. Further, the single representative of the genus Arctosa examined in our study was placed at a more ancestral position than in a previous investigation based on phenotypic characters. The superimposition of the currently used diagnostic phenotypic characters on the DNA-based phylogeny shows that both character sets are widely congruent; only 3 out of 16 phenotypic characters were resolved as homoplasious, suggesting their parallel evolution and/or reversal. Among the three different styles of predation found in the Lycosids, tube builders appear to be the most ancestral from which burrow dwellers descended and from which two groups of vagrant hunters evolved in parallel.
S385	K. M. Halanych;J. R. Demboski;B. J. van Vuuren;D. R. Klein;J. A. Cook	1999	Cytochrome b phylogeny of North American hares and jackrabbits (Lepus, Lagomorpha) and the effects of saturation in outgroup taxa	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution	11	2	213-221	10.1006/mpev.1998.0581		Lepus; hare; jackrabbit; cytochrome b; Lagomorpha; phylogeny; saturation; rooting	Jackrabbits and hares, members of the genus Lepus, comprise over half of the species within the family Leporidae (Lagomorpha). Despite their ecological importance, potential economic impact, and worldwide distribution, the evolution of hares and jackrabbits has been poorly studied. We provide an initial phylogenetic framework for jackrabbits and hares so that explicit hypotheses about their evolution can be developed and tested. To this end, we have collected DNA sequence data from a 702 base pair region of the mitochondrial cytochrome b gene and reconstructed the evolutionary history (via parsimony, neighbor joining, and maximum likelihood) of 11 species of Lepus, focusing on North American taxa. Due to problems of saturation, induced by multiple substitutions, at synonymous coding positions between the ingroup taxa and the outgroups (Oryctolagus and Sylvilagus), both rooted and unrooted trees were examined. Variation in tree topologies generated by different reconstruction methods was observed in analyses including the outgroups, but not in the analyses of unrooted ingroup networks. Apparently, substitutional saturation hindered the analyses when outgroups were considered. The trees based on the cytochrome b data indicate that the taxonomic status of some species needs to be reassessed, and that species of Lepus within North America do
S605	J. S. Hopple;R. Vilgalys	1999	Phylogenetic Relationships in the Mushroom Genus Coprinus and Dark-Spored Allies Based on Sequence Data from the Nuclear Gene Coding for the Large Ribosomal Subunit RNA: Divergent Domains, Outgroups, and Monophyly	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution	13	1	1-19	10.1006/mpev.1999.0634			Phylogenetic relationships were investigated in the mushroom genus Coprinus based on sequence data from the nuclear encoded large-subunit rDNA gene. Forty-seven species of Coprinus and 19 additional species from the families Coprinaceae, Strophariaceae, Bolbitiaceae, Agaricaceae, Podaxaceae, and Montagneaceae were studied. A total of 1360 sites was sequenced across seven divergent domains and intervening sequences. Atotal of 302 phylogenetically informative characters was found. Ninety-eight percent of the average divergence between taxa was located within the divergent domains, with domains D2 and D8 being most divergent and domains D7 and D10 the least divergent. An empirical test of phylogenetic signal among divergent domains also showed that domains D2 and D3 had the lowest levels of homoplasy. Two equally most parsimonious trees were resolved using Wagner parsimony. A character-state weighted analysis produced 12 equally most parsimonious trees similar to those generated by Wagner parsimony. Phylogenetic analyses employing topological constraints suggest that none of the major taxonomic systems proposed for subgeneric classification is able to completely reflect phylogenetic relationships in Coprinus. A strict consensus integration of the two Wagner trees demonstrates the problematic nature of choosing outgroups within dark-spored mushrooms. The genus Coprinus is found to be polyphyletic and is separated into three distinct clades. Most Coprinus taxa belong to the first two clades, which together form a larger monophyletic group with Lacrymaria and Psathyrella in basal positions. A third clade contains members of Coprinus section Comati as well as the genus Leucocoprinus, Podaxis pistillaris, Montagnea arenaria, and Agaricus pocillator. This third clade is separated from the other species of Coprinus by members of the families Strophariaceae and Bolbitiaceae and the genus Panaeolus.
S443	A. M. Kretzer;T. D. Bruns	1999	Use of atp6 in fungal phylogenetics: an example from the Boletales	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution	13	3	483-492	10.1006/mpev.1999.0680			Complete nucleotide sequences have been determined for atp6 from Suillus luteus and cox3 from Suillus sinuspaulianus (Boletales, Hymenomycetes, Basidiomycota), which code for ATPase subunit 6 and cytochrome oxidase subunit 3, respectively. These sequences were used to design PCR primers for the amplification of partial atp6 and cox3 sequences from other members of the Boletales and outgroup taxa. In atp6 and cox3 from Russula rosacea, one of the outgroup taxa, we observed a number of in frame TGAtrp codons, which imply a Neurospora crassa -type mitochondrial code in Russula rosacea and possibly in the basidiomycetes in general. Interestingly, however, most basidiomycetes other than R. rosacea appear to strongly prefer the TGGtrp codon, which is unusual given the strong A+T bias in fungal mitochondrial genomes. Pairwise comparisons were performed between atp6 sequences from increasingly divergent fungal lineages, and results show that all three codon positions become saturated in substitutions after an estimated divergence time of approx. 300 Ma. This means that atp6 is likely to provide phylogenetic resolution within fungal classes, but not at higher taxonomic levels. Also, because of the strong A+T bias in fungal mitochondrial genomes, A/T transversions were found to be more common than any other type of substitution resulting in transversions being about 2-3 times more common in most pairwise sequence comparisons. Finally, atp6 sequences were used to infer phylogenetic relationships between 27 taxa from the Boletales and 4 outgroup taxa. Analyses were performed (i) on nucleotide sequence data using parsimony (successive approximation) as well as maximum likelihood methods and (ii) on deduced amino acid sequences using distance methods based on empirical substitution probabilities. Results from the various analyses are largely concordant with each other as well as with prior analyses of partial mitochondrial large subunit rDNA (mtLSU rDNA). Analysis of the combined atp6 and mtLSU rDNA sequences resulted in increased bootstrap support for several key branches. Relationships that have been resolved for the first time in the current analysis will be discussed.
S422	A. Murrell;N. J. H. Campbell;S. C. Barker	1999	Mitochondrial 12S rDNA indicates that the Rhipicephalinae (Acari: Ixodida: Ixodidae) is paraphyletic	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution	12	1	83-86	10.1006/mpev.1998.0595			
S808	W. R. Buck;B. Goffinet;A. J. Shaw	2000	Testing morphological concepts of orders of pleurocarpous mosses (Bryophyta) using phylogenetic reconstructions based on trnL-trnF and rps4 sequences	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution	16	2	180-198	10.1006/mpev.2000.0805			The ordinal classification of pleurocarpous mosses rests on characters such as branching mode and architecture of the peristome teeth that line the mouth of the capsule. The Leucodontales comprise mainly epiphytic taxa, characterized by sympodial branching and reduced peristome, while the Hypnales are primarily terricolous and monopodially branching. The third order, the Hookeriales, is defined by a unique architecture of the endostome. We sampled 78 exemplar taxa representing most families of these orders and sequenced two chloroplast loci, the trnL-trnF region and the rps4 gene, to test the monophyly and relationships of these orders of pleurocarpous mosses. Analyses of the combined data set were performed under three optimality criteria, with different sets of assumptions such as excluding hypervariable positions, downweighting the most likely transformations, and indirect weighting of rps4 codon positions by including amino acid translations. Our analyses suggest that 1) the pleurocarpous mosses, with the exception of the Cyrtopodaceae, form a monophyletic group which is here given formal recognition as the Hypnidae; 2) the Leucodontales are at least paraphyletic; 3) the Hypnales form, with most members of the Leucodontalean grade, a monophyletic group sister to a Hookerialean lineage. The Hypopterygiaceae, Hookeriales, as well as a clade composed of Neorutenbergia, Pseudocryphaea, and Trachyloma likely represent a basal clade or grade within the Hypnidae. These results suggest that mode of branching and reduced peristomes are homoplastic at the ordinal level in pleurocarpous mosses.
S568	M. Kennedy;R. D. Gray;H. G. Spencer	2000	The phylogenetic relationships of the shags and cormorants: Can sequence data resolve a disagreement between behavior and morphology?	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution	17	3	345-359	10.1006/mpev.2000.0840			Taxonomic arrangements for the cormorants and shags (Phalacrocoracidae) had varied greatly until two quite similar arrangements, one based on behavior and the other on osteological characters, became the basis for current thought on the evolutionary relationships of these birds. The terms cormorant and shag, which had previously been haphazardly applied to members of the group, became the vernacular terms for the two major subdivisions within this family. The two taxonomies differ in places, however, with the behavioral taxonomy placing several species within the shags and the osteological taxonomy and phylogeny grouping those species (as the marine cormorants) and placing them within the cormorants. In an attempt to resolve the differences in the relationships hypothesized by behavior and morphology, we sequenced three mitochondrial genes (12S, ATPase 6, and ATPase 8). Initial equally weighted parsimony trees differed slightly from our two weighted parsimony trees, one of which was also our maximum-likelihood tree. Many of the branches within our trees were well supported, but some sections of the phylogeny proved difficult to resolve with confidence. Our sequence trees differ substantially from the morphological phylogeny and show that neither the shags nor the cormorants are monophyletic, but form an intermingled group. Some of the groups supported by both the behavioral and the morphological taxonomies (e.g., the cliff shags, Stictocarbo) appear to be polyphyletic. Conversely, the monophyly of the blue-eyed shags, a traditional group that the osteological analysis had found to be paraphyletic, was supported by the sequence data. Until more taxa are sampled and a fully robust phylogeny is obtained, a conservative approach accepting a single genus, Phalacrocorax, for the shags and cormorants is recommended.
S557	R. Leys;S. J. B. Cooper;M. P. Schwarz	2000	Molecular Phylogeny of the Large Carpenter Bees, Genus Xylocopa (Hymenoptera: Apidae), Based on Mitochondrial DNA Sequences	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution	17	3	407-418	10.1006/mpev.2000.0851		mitochondrial DNA; CO1; Cytb; Xylocopa; carpenter bees; molecular phylogeny; biogeography; vicariance; dispersal; Gondwana	Carpenter bees, genus Xylocopa Latreille, a group of bees found on all continents, are of particular interest to behavioral ecologists because of their utility for studies of the evolution of mating strategies and sociality. This paper presents phylogenetic analyses based on sequences of two mitochondrial genes cytochrome oxidase 1 and cytochrome b for 22 subgenera of Xylocopa. Maximum-parsimony and maximum-likelihood methods were used to infer phylogenetic relationships. The analyses resulted in three resolved clades of subgenera: a South American group (including the subgenera Stenoxylocopa, Megaxylocopa, and Neoxylocopa), a group including the subgenera Xylocopa s.s. and Ctenoxylocopa, and an Ethiopean group (includ-ing the subgenera Afroxylocopa, Mesotrichia, Alloxylocopa, Platynopoda, Hoploxylocopa, and Koptorto-soma). The relationships between the 11 other subgenera and the resolved clades are unclear. Within the Ethiopian group we found a clear separation of the African and the Oriental taxa and apparent polyphyly of the subgenus Koptortosoma. Using an evolutionary rate for ants, we investigated whether Gondwana vicariance or more recent dispersal events could best explain the present-day distribution of subgenera. Although some taxa show divergences that approach Gondwanan breakup times, most divergences between geographic groups are too recent to support a vicariance hypothesis. 
S554	M. Medina;P. J. Walsh	2000	Molecular Systematics of the Order Anaspidea Based on Mitochondrial DNA Sequence (12S, 16S, and COI)	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution	15	1	41-58	10.1006/mpev.1999.0736			Fragments from three mitochondrial genes (12S, 16S, and COI) were sequenced to reconstruct a molecular phylogeny of the opisthobranch order Anaspidea. The molecular phylogeny supports the placement of the genus Akera, a taxon previously regarded by some authors as a cephalaspidean, within the Anaspidea. Incongruence between the molecular data and the classifications based on morphology suggests that some of the taxonomic characters (i.e., shell, parapodia fusion) traditionally used for the classification of sea hares must be reevaluated, since they maybe homoplastic. The ancestral nature of Notarchus based on the molecular evidence suggests that homoplasy may be an explanation for the morphological resemblance of this species to the more derived sea hares with highly fused parapodia and concentrated nerve ganglia. Finally, examples are given of how comparative studies of the evolution of learning mechanisms in the anaspidean clade will benefit from the phylogenetic hypothesis presented in this paper.
S414	W. H. Piel;K. J. Nutt	2000	One species or several? Discordant patterns of geographic variation between allozymes and mtDNA sequences among spiders in the genus Metepeira (Araneae: Araneidae)	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution	15	3	414-418	10.1006/mpev.1999.0763		Metepeira; allozymes; mitochondrial ribosomal DNA; discordance; molecular systematics	Paradoxically, an allozyme study of Metepeira "spinipes" (sensu lato) demonstrated extensive gene flow among four populations whose members are nevertheless morphologically and behaviorally distinct. Initially the authors tentatively concluded that the populations exhibited panmixis, and suggested that local environmental effects accounted for the apparent morphological and behavioral differences. However, they later concluded that such differences were too great to be accounted for by the environment alone, and that the four populations actually represented three different species. To confirm that the allozyme results were, in fact, artifactual, we reexamined the relationships among these populations by sequencing a portion of the 12S mtDNA ribosomal subunit. In contrast to the allozyme result, our results demonstrate good agreement between patterns of genetic and morphological/behavioral variation. We suggest (1) that the allozyme allele frequencies are homogenized by balancing selection, not gene flow as was previously concluded, and therefore (2) that this study provides another instance where inferences about population structures from allozyme data are misleading.
S412	D. Redecker;J. B. Morton;T. D. Bruns	2000	Ancestral lineages of arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi (Glomales)	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution	14	2	276-284	10.1006/mpev.1999.0713			Using new and existing 18S rRNA sequence data we show that at least five species of glomalean fungi lie outside the previously defined families and are diverged very early in the evolution of that group. These five fungi would have been missed by many previous ecological studies because their sequences are not well matched to available taxon-specific primers and four of the five do not stain well with the standard reagents used for morphological analysis. Based upon spore morphology, these species are currently assigned to Glomus and Acaulospora, and two of the species are dimorphic, exhibiting spore stages of both genera. This suggests that dimorphic spores are the ancestral state for the order and that one or the other morphology was lost in various lineages. Our analyses also show that Geosiphon pyriforme, a symbiont with cyanobacteria that is putatively the nearest outgroup, is not necessarily outside the Glomales; instead it may be derived from mycorrhizal ancestors.
S524	M. Thollesson	2000	Increasing fidelity in parsimony analysis of dorid nudibranchs by differential weighting, or a tale of two genes	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution	16	2	161-172	10.1006/mpev.2000.0789			Phylogenetic analyses of 22 dorid nudibranch species and two outgroup (dendronotacean and notaspidean) species were performed using sequences from two different mitochondrial genes (16S rRNA and COI). Several methods of differential weighting (positional, transformational, and combined) were explored using character congruence between the linked data sets as an optimality criterion. Most weighting schemes gave an increase in congruence as well as phylogenetic signal. The optimal weighting scheme according to the criterion was successive weighting of each character (positional weighting) with 1/(number of steps) in combination with LN weighting of character changes (transformational weighting). The cladogram from the optimal weighting scheme was, in general, congruent with existing classifications. One exception is the genus Goniodoris, which was paraphyletic if Okenia aspersa was not also included. 
S481	C. H. M. van Moorsel;E. G. M. Dijkstra;E. Gittenberger	2000	Molecular Evidence for Repetitive Parallel Evolution of Shell Structure in Clausiliidae (Gastropoda, Pulmonata)	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution	17	2	200 –208	10.1006/mpev.2000.0826		Phylogeny; rDNA; ITS; clausilial apparatus; parallel evolution; Clausiliidae	The division of clausiliid genera, using the type of clausilial apparatus (CA) as the decisive criterion, is ambiguous. Two types of CA can be distinguished: the normal (N) type and the Graciliaria (G) type. Morphological resemblance between species with different types of CA led to the hypothesis that the CA type is homoplasious. Therefore sequence variation, phylogenetic relationships, and the evolution of the CA were studied in the genera Albinaria, Isabellaria, and Sericata. Phylogenetic relations were inferred from parsimony and neighbor-joining analyses of the nucleotide sequences of both internal transcribed spacers (ITS1 and ITS2) of the rDNA of 36 species. The variation among the sequences was great: 21.8% of the sequences were ambiguously aligned and excluded from the analysis. A high GC content in the unambiguously aligned portions and a substitutional bias toward a higher GC content are indicators of substitutional constraints in the spacers. We analyzed the data in several ways: using both spacers together and separately, weighting all mutations equally, correcting for transition/transversion bias by weighting, and using transversions only. In all resulting trees, Isabellaria is not a monophyletic group. Its division into two clades is supported by over 40 mutations and one large indel. Clade 1 consists of Isabellaria and Sericata and clade 2 consists of Isabellaria and Albinaria species. The present distribution of the CA type was plotted on the tree and its most parsimonious evolution was reconstructed. The CA type was shown to be highly homoplasious. In clade 1 and clade 2 both types of CA were found; depending on the ancestral state, either the G or the N type evolved several times in parallel. These results contribute decisively to the current debate on the morphological diagnoses of Albinaria, Sericata, and Isabellaria as monophyletic taxa.
S570	R. H. Cruickshank;K. P. Johnson;V. S. Smith;R. J. Adams;D. H. Clayton;R. D. M. Page	2001	Phylogenetic analysis of partial sequences of elongation factor 1α identifies major groups of lice (Insecta: Phthiraptera)	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution	19	2	202-215	10.1006/mpev.2001.0928		elongation factor 1α; leaf stability analysis; molecular systematics; niche specialization; phylogenetics; lice; Phthiraptera; Ischnocera	As a first attempt to use molecular data to resolve the relationships between the four suborders of lice and within the suborder Ischnocera, we sequenced a 347-bp fragment of the elongation factor 1α gene of 127 lice (Insecta: Phthiraptera) as well as outgroup taxa from the order Psocoptera. A number of well-supported monophyletic groups were found but the relationships among many of these groups could not be resolved. While it is probable that multiple substitutions at high divergences and ancient radiation over a short period of time have contributed to the problem, we attribute most of this lack of resolution to the high ratio of taxa to characters. Nevertheless, the sequence data unequivocally support a number of important relationships that are at variance with the conclusions of morphological taxonomy. These include the sister group relationship of Chelopistes and Oxylipeurus, two lice occupying different ecological niches on the same host, which have previously been assigned to different families. These results provide evidence in support of the hypothesis that lice have speciated in situ on the host in response to niche specialization and that this has given rise to convergent morphologies in the lice of different host groups which share similar ecological niches. We discuss our attempts to overcome the limitations of this large data set, including the use of leaf stability analysis, a new method for analyzing the stability of taxa in a phylogenetic tree, and examine a number of hypotheses of relationships based on both traditional taxonomy and host associations. 
S529	T. Fukatsu;H. Shibao;N. Nikoh;S. Aoki	2001	Genetically distinct populations in an Asian soldier-producing aphid Pseudoregma bambucicola (Homoptera: Aphididae) identified by DNA fingerprinting and molecular phylogenetic analysis	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution	18	3	423-433	10.1006/mpev.2000.0887		Pseudoregma bambucicola; Pseudoregma carolinensis; soldier-producing aphid; AP-PCR DNA ﬁngerprinting; molecular phylogeny; mitochondrial ribosomal DNA	To estimate genetic structure of a soldier-producing aphid Pseudoregma bambucicola, samples from natural populations covering southeastern Asia were analyzed by a DNA fingerprinting technique. We unexpectedly found that P. bambucicola is constituted by two geographic groups, the northern group and the southern group, that were genetically distinct from each other but morphologically almost indistinguishable. Molecular phylogenetic and statistical analyses based on mitochondrial ribosomal DNA sequences demonstrated that the northern and southern groups of P. bambucicola are not closely related but constitute distinct lineages in the genus Pseudoregma. Detailed morphological re-examination revealed that the two groups could be distinguished by the number of setae on the 8th abdominal tergite of 1st instar nymphs and soldiers. From these results, it was suggested that P. bambucicola should be divided into two species. The northern group from Japan, Taiwan, Hong Kong and northern Vietnam retains the name P. bambucicola, whereas we suggest that the name P. carolinensis (Takahashi, 1941) should be used for the southern group from Thailand, Malay Peninsula, Java, Irian Jaya and Micronesia. The morphological resemblance between P. bambucicola and P. carolinensis might be due to shared ancestral characters of the genus Pseudoregma.
S522	L. D. Guo;K. D. Hyde;E. C. Y. Liew	2001	Detection and taxonomic placement of endophytic fungi within frond tissues of Livistona chinensis based on rDNA sequences	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution	20	1	1-13	10.1006/mpev.2001.0942		 molecular identiﬁcation; molecular phylogenetics; environmental DNA; mycelia sterilia; ribosomal RNA gene	The 5.8S gene and flanking internal transcribed spacers (ITS1 and ITS2) of the rDNA were amplified from total DNA extracted from frond tissues of Livistona chinensis using universal and fungal specific primers. These amplified fragments were cloned and sequenced. Phylogenetic analysis based on the 5.8S gene sequences indicated that the six clone sequences obtained were of different origins. Five sequences, P1-9, P2-6, P4-4, P4-5, and P4-7, belonged to the fungi and one sequence, P3-2, belonged to the plants. P1-9 was inferred to belong to the Basidiomycota based on the phylogenetic analysis of the 5.8S gene sequences but could not be identified to lower taxonomic levels. Further identification of the other four fungal clones to lower taxonomic levels were conducted based on phylogenetic analysis and sequence comparison of both the conserved 5.8S gene and the variable ITS regions. The origin of P2-6 was identified to be Glomerella and its anamorph Colletotrichum; the origins of P4-5 and P4-7 were Mycosphaerella and its anamorph Cladosporium; while P4-4 was from the Herpotrichiellaceae. The direct approach to detecting and taxonomic placement of endophytic fungi within host tissue without the need for conventional in vitro culturing is discussed.
S560	M. C. Hedin	2001	Molecular Insights into Species Phylogeny, Biogeography, and Morphological Stasis in the Ancient Spider Genus Hypochilus (Araneae: Hypochilidae)	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution	18	1	238-251	10.1006/mpev.2000.0882			The spider genus Hypochilus is currently restricted to cool, moist microhabitats in three widely separated montane regions of North America, providing an opportunity to study both deep (i.e., continental level) and shallow (within montane region) biogeographic history. Members of the genus also retain many plesiomorphic morphological characteristics, inviting the study of comparative rates of morphological evolution. In this paper, Hypochilus phylogeny and associated evolutionary problems are addressed using both new molecular (28S nDNA and CO1 mtDNA) and previously published (K. M. Catley, 1994, Am. Mus. Nov. 3088, 1–27) morphological data. Although the molecular data provide limited resolution of root placement within Hypochilus, most analyses are at least consistent with morphology-supported montane relationships of (Rockies (California, Appalachian)). The monophyly of Hypochilus species distributed in the California mountains is ambiguous, with several analyses indicating that this fauna may be paraphyletic with respect to a monophyletic Appalachian lineage. The montane regions differ in consistent ways in depths of both mitochondrial and nuclear phylogenetic divergence. Molecular clock analyses, in combination with arthropod-based mtDNA rate calibrations, suggest that the regional faunas are of different ages and that speciation in all faunas likely occurred prior to the Pleistocene. Limited intraspecific sampling reveals extraordinarily high levels of mtDNA cytochrome oxidase sequence divergence. These extreme divergences are most consistent with morphological stasis at the species level, despite preliminary evidence that Hypochilus taxa are characterized by fragmented population structures.
S603	M. C. Hedin;W. P. Maddison	2001	A Combined Molecular Approach to Phylogeny of the Jumping Spider Subfamily Dendryphantinae (Araneae: Salticidae)	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution	18	3	386-403	10.1006/mpev.2000.0883		molecular phylogeny; Salticidae; cytochrome oxidase; incongruence; homoplasy; sequence alignment; secondary structure; ribosomal DNA	Four gene regions were sequenced for 30 species of jumping spiders, most from the subfamily Dendryphantinae, to investigate their molecular phylogeny and evolution. These are three regions from the mitochondria (ca. 560 bp of 16S plus adjacent tRNA, 1047 bp of cytochrome oxidase 1 (CO1), and 414 bp of NADH1 (ND1) and one region from the nuclear genome (ca. 750 bp of 28S). Parsimony and likelihood analyses of these gene regions separately and together support the monophyly of the dendryphantines as delimited previously by morphological characters. A group of elongate-bodied genera are placed as basal among the dendryphantines, and previously proposed relationships of Poultonella, Paraphidippus, and Sassacus vitis are confirmed. Comparison of overall rates of molecular evolution indicates striking differences across the gene regions, with highest divergence in ND1, CO1, 16S, and 28S in decreasing order. All four regions are characterized by both within- and among-site rate variation. Phylogenetic results from CO1 conflict conspicuously with phylogenetic results from the other genes and morphological data. Attempts to account for potential sources of this conflict (e.g., accommodating biased base composition, high homoplasy, within- and among-site rate variation, etc.) are largely unsuccessful.
S619	C. Lopez-Vaamonde;J. Y. Rasplus;G. D. Weiblen;J. M. Cook	2001	Molecular phylogenies of fig wasps: Partial cocladogenesis of pollinators and parasites	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution	21	1	55-71	10.1006/mpev.2001.0993		Agaonidae; Pleistodontes; Sycoscapter; Ficus; fig wasps; Malvanthera; coevolution; cospeciation; 28S; ITS2; cytochrome b	Figs (Ficus spp., Moraceae) and their pollinating wasps form an obligate mutualism, which has long been considered a classic case of coevolution and cospeciation. Figs are also exploited by several clades of nonpollinating wasps, which are parasites of the mutualism and whose patterns of speciation have received little attention. We used data from nuclear and mitochondrial DNA regions to estimate the phylogenies of 20 species of Pleistodontes pollinating wasps and 16 species of Sycoscapter nonpollinating wasps associated with Ficus species in the section Malvanthera. We compare the phylogenies of 15 matched Pleistodontes/Sycoscapter species pairs and show that the level of cospeciation is significantly greater than that expected by chance. Our estimates of the maximum level of cospeciation (50 to 64% of nodes) are very similar to those obtained in other recent studies of coevolved parasitic and mutualistic associations. However, we also show that there is not perfect congruence of pollinator and parasite phylogenies (for any substantial clade) and argue that host plant switching is likely to be less constrained for Sycoscapter parasites than for Pleistodontes pollinators. There is perfect correspondence between two terminal clades of two sister species in the respective phylogenies, and rates of molecular evolution in these pairs are similar.
S647	A. Monteiro;N. E. Pierce	2001	Phylogeny of Bicyclus (Lepidoptera: Nymphalidae) inferred from COI, COII, and EF-1α gene sequences	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution	18	2	264-281	10.1006/mpev.2000.0872		Bicyclus; Lepidoptera; Nymphalidae; Satyrinae; phylogeny; COI; COII; EF-1α; parsimony; maximum likelihood; phenotypic plasticity; wing pattern; development; eyespots	Despite the fact that Bicyclus anynana has become an important model species for wing-pattern developmental biology and studies of phenotypic plasticity, little is known of the evolutionary history of the genus Bicyclus and the position of B. anynana. Understanding the evolution of development as well as the evolution of plasticity can be attempted in this species-rich genus that displays a large range of wing patterns with variable degrees of phenotypic responses to the environment. A context to guide extrapolations from population genetic studies within B. anynana to those between closely related species has been long overdue. A phylogeny of 54 of the 80 known Bicyclus species is presented based on the combined 3000-bp sequences of two mitochondrial genes, cytochrome oxidase I and II, and the nuclear gene, elongation factor 1α. A series of tree topologies, constructed either from the individual genes or from the combined data, using heuristic searches under a variety of weighting schemes were compared under the best maximum-likelihood models fitted for each gene separately. The most likely tree topology to have generated the three data sets was found to be a tree resulting from a combined MP analysis with equal weights. Most phylogenetic signal for the analysis comes from silent substitutions at the third position, and despite the faster rate of evolution and higher levels of homoplasy of the mitochondrial genes relative to the nuclear gene, the latter does not show substantially stronger support for basal clades. Finally, moving branches from the chosen tree topology to other positions on the tree so as to comply better with a previous morphological study did not significantly affect tree length.
S532	M. P. Simmons;V. Savolainen;C. C. Clevinger;R. H. Archer;J. I. Davis	2001	Phylogeny of the Celastraceae inferred from 26S nuclear ribosomal DNA, phytochrome B, rbcL, atpB, and morphology	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution	19	3	353-366	10.1006/mpev.2001.0937		26S nuclear ribosomal DNA; Brexia; Celastraceae; Forsellesia; Goupia; Hippocrateaceae; Parnassiaceae; Plagiopteron	Phylogenetic relationships within Celastraceae (spindle-tree family) were inferred from nucleotide sequence characters from the 5′ end of 26S nuclear ribosomal DNA (including expansion segments D1–D3; 84 species sampled), phytochrome B (58 species), rbcL (31 species), atpB (23 species), and morphology (94 species). Among taxa of questionable affinity, Forsellesia is a member of Crossosomataceae, and Goupia is excluded from Celastraceae. However, Brexia, Canotia, Lepuropetalon, Parnassia, Siphonodon, and Stackhousiaceae are supported as members of Celastraceae. Gymnosporia and Tricerma are distinct from Maytenus, Cassine is supported as distinct from Elaeodendron, and Dicarpellum is distinct from Salacia. Catha, Maytenus, and Pristimera are not resolved as natural genera. Hippocrateaceae (including Plagiopteron and Lophopetalum) are a clade nested within a paraphyletic Celastraceae. These data also suggest that the Loesener's classification of Celastraceae sensu stricto and Hallé's classification of Hippocrateaceae are artificial. The diversification of the fruit and aril within Celastraceae appears to be complex, with multiple origins of most fruit and aril forms.
S644	M. Binder;D. S. Hibbett	2002	Higher-level phylogenetic relationships of homobasidiomycetes (mushroom-forming fungi) inferred from four rDNA regions	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution	22	1	76–90	10.1006/mpev.2001.1043		basidiomycota; evolution; combining ; data; ribosomal DNA	Homobasidiomycetes include approximately 13,000 described species of mushroom-forming fungi and related taxa. The higher-level classification of this ecologically important group has been unsettled for over one hundred years. The goals of the present study were to evaluate a recent phylogenetic classification by Hibbett and Thorn that divided the homobasidiomycetes into eight major unranked clades, and to infer the higher-order relationships among these clades. A dataset of 93 species that represent all eight previously recognized clades was assembled, with 3800 bp of sequence data from nuclear and mitochondrial large and small subunit rDNAs for each taxon. Parsimony and maximum likelihood analyses support the monophyly of the eight major clades recognized by Hibbett and Thorn. Most groups are strongly supported in bootstrapped parsimony analyses, but the polyporoid clade remains weakly supported. For the first time, the sister-group relationship of the euagarics clade and bolete clade is strongly supported, and the Hygrophoraceae is strongly supported as the sister group of the rest of the euagarics clade. Nevertheless, the backbone of the homobasidiomycete phylogeny, and the internal structure of several clades, remain poorly resolved.
S659	C. Erséus;M. Källersjö;M. Ekman;R. Hovmöller	2002	18S rDNA phylogeny of the Tubificidae (Clitellata) and its constituent taxa: dismissal of the Naididae 	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution	22	3	414-422	10.1006/mpev.2001.1063		Tubificidae; Naididae; Phreodrilinae; 18S rDNA; phylogeny;  classification	The phylogeny of the Tubificidae, and of most of its subfamilies and some of its genera, is revisited, on the basis of sequences of 18S ribosomal DNA in a selection of species. Forty-six new 18S sequences of Naididae (6), Tubificidae (37), Phreodrilidae (1), Lumbriculidae (1), and Enchytraeidae (1) are reported and aligned together with corresponding sequences of 21 previously studied taxa. The 18S gene of Insulodrilus bifidus provides the first molecular evidence that phreodrilids are closely related to tubificids, corroborating previous conclusions based on morphology. The data further support the monophyletic status of Tubificidae, provided that the “Naididae” is regarded a part of this family; “naidids” may not even constitute a monophyletic group. It is thus suggested that the family name Naididae is formally suppressed as a junior synonym of the Tubificidae. The 18S gene also resolves a number of relationships within the tubificids. Among the subfamilies, Tubificinae is supported, Rhyacodrilinae and Phallodrilinae are revealed as nonmonophyletic, and Limnodriloidinae remains unresolved. Most tubificid genera tested for monophyly are corroborated by the data, only one (Tubifex) is refuted, and two (Tubificoides and Limnodriloides) are unresolved from other taxa. It is concluded that it will be valuable to expand the taxonomic sampling for 18S rDNA in clitellates, and in annelids in general, as this is likely to improve the resolution at many levels. However, it will be equally important to combine the annelid 18S data with other gene sequences and nonmolecular characters, to estimate the phylogeny of these common and diverse worms with greater precision.
S711	D. Fewer;T. Friedl;B. Büdel	2002	Chroococcidiopsis and heterocyst-differentiating cyanobacteria are each other's closest living relatives	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution	23	1	82-90	10.1006/mpev.2001.1075		Chroococcidiopsis; heterocyst; sister taxa; Pleurocapsales; multiple fission; Myxosarcina; primitive cyanobacteria; survival cells	Many filamentous cyanobacteria reduce atmospheric nitrogen in specialized differentiated cells called heterocysts. Here we present evidence that shows that members of the unicellular non-heterocyst-differentiating genus Chroococcidiopsis and the filamentous heterocyst-differentiating cyanobacteria are each other's closest living relatives. Distance, maximum-parsimony, and maximum-likelihood analyses of complete small subunit ribosomal RNA gene sequences yielded highly congruent support for the monophyly of Chroococcidiopsis and the heterocyst-differentiating cyanobacteria. Our results demonstrate that the order Pleurocapsales, which traditionally contains Chroococcidiopsis, is a polyphyletic assemblage with the ability to reproduce by multiple fission having arisen independently at least twice during the cyanobacterial radiation. Our data also reject Myxosarcina as a sister taxon to Chroococcidiopsis, indicating that the numerous presumed shared derived characters thought to unite the two genera evolved independently. The sequence divergence within the Chroococcidiopsis lineage is comparable to and probably exceeds that in the entire heterocyst-differentiating lineage. Chroococcidiopsis forms unique survival cells under nitrogen-limiting conditions, and the sister group relationship with the heterocystous cyanobacteria shown here suggests that differentiation of these cells and heterocysts may be related processes.
S645	A. Rokas;J. A. A. Nylander;F. Ronquist;G. N. Stone	2002	A maximum likelihood analysis of eight phylogenetic markers in gallwasps (Hymenoptera: Cynipidae); implications for insect phylogenetic studies	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution	22	2	206-219	10.1006/mpev.2001.1032		gallwasps; Cynipidae; Hymenoptera; likelihood; DNA sequence; rDNA; EF1α F1; opsin; cytochrome b; cytochrome oxidase I; insect systematics	We assessed the utility of eight DNA sequence markers (5.8S rDNA, 18S rDNA, 28S rDNA, ITS regions, long-wavelength opsin, elongation factor 1-α, cytochrome b, and cytochrome oxidase I) in reconstructing phylogenetic relationships at various levels of divergence in gallwasps (Hymenoptera: Cynipidae), using a set of eight exemplar taxa. We report sequence divergence values and saturation levels and compare phylogenetic results of these sequences analyzed both separately and combined to a well-corroborated morphological phylogeny. Likelihood ratio tests were used to find the best evolutionary model fitting each of the markers. The likelihood model best explaining the data is, for most loci, parameter rich, with strong A-T bias for mitochondrial loci and strong rate heterogeneity for the majority of loci. Our data suggest that 28S rDNA, elongation factor 1-α, and long-wavelength opsin may be potentially useful markers for the resolution of cynipid and other insect within-family-level divergences (circa 50–100 mya old), whereas mitochondrial loci and ITS regions are most useful for lower-level phylogenetics. In contrast, the 18S rDNA marker is likely to be useful for the resolution of above-family-level relationships.
S672	S. R. Santos;D. J. Taylor;R. A. Kinzie III;M. Hidaka;K. Sakai;M. A. Coffroth	2002	Molecular phylogeny of symbiotic dinoflagellates inferred from partial chloroplast large subunit (23S)-rDNA	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution	23	2	97-111	10.1016/S1055-7903(02)00010-6		Chloroplast; Large subunit ribosomal genes; Dinoflagellate; Symbiodinium; Symbiosis; Symbiotic dinoflagellates; Zooxanthellae	Symbiotic associations between invertebrates and dinoflagellates of the genus Symbiodinium are a common occurrence in marine environments. However, despite our extensive knowledge concerning the physiological contributions of these algae to their symbiotic partners, our understanding of zooxanthella phylogenetics is still in its early stages. In the past 10 years, studies of Symbiodinium phylogenetics have relied solely on nuclear ribosomal (rDNA) genes. To date, organellar DNA sequences have not been employed to infer phylogenies for this genus of symbiotic dinoflagellates. We address this by presenting the first Symbiodinium phylogeny based on chloroplast (cp) large subunit (23S)-rDNA sequences. Cp23S-rDNA Domain V sequences were determined for 35 dinoflagellate cultures isolated from a range of invertebrate host species and geographical locations. Symbiodinium phylogenies inferred from cp23S-rDNA produced topologies that were not statistically different from those generated from nuclear rDNA, providing the first independent evidence supporting the published major clades of Symbiodinium. In addition, comparisons of sequence dissimilarity indicated that cp23S-rDNA Domain V evolves 9–30 times faster than the V1–V4 regions of nuclear small subunit (n18S)-rDNA, 1–7 times as fast as the D1–D3 regions of nuclear large subunit (n28S)-rDNA, and 0.27–2.25 times that of the internal transcribed spacer (ITS)-rDNA region. Our data suggested that cp23S-rDNA Domain V will prove to be a useful molecule for exploring Symbiodinium phylogenetics.
S740	M. P. Simmons;J. V. Freudenstein	2002	Uninode coding vs. gene-tree parsimony for phylogenetic reconstruction using duplicate genes	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution	23	3	481-498	10.1016/S1055-7903(02)00033-7			Two different methods of using paralogous genes for phylogenetic inference have been proposed: reconciled trees (or gene tree parsimony) and uninode coding. Gene tree parsimony suffers from 10 serious problems, including differential weighting of nucleotide and gap characters, undersampling which can be misinterpreted as synapomorphy, all of the characters not being allowed to interact, and conflict between gene trees being given equal weight, regardless of branch support. These problems are largely avoided by using uninode coding. The uninode coding method is elaborated to address multiple gene duplications within a single gene tree family and handle problems caused by lack of gene tree resolution. An example of vertebrate phylogeny inferred from nine genes is reanalyzed using uninode coding. We suggest that uninode coding be used instead of gene tree parsimony for phylogenetic inference from paralogous genes.
S737	T. P. Wilcox;D. J. Zwickl;T. A. Heath;D. M. Hillis	2002	Phylogenetic relationships of the dwarf boas and a comparison of bayesian and bootstrap measures of phylogenetic support	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution	25	2	361-371	10.1016/S1055-7903(02)00244-0		Bayesian analysis; Bootstrapping; Phylogenetic support; Phylogeny; Dwarf boas; Snakes; Serpentes; Tropidophiidae; Ungaliophiidae; Booidea; Macrostomata; Caenophidea; Exiliboa; Trachyboa; Tropidophis; Ungaliophis	Four New World genera of dwarf boas (Exiliboa, Trachyboa, Tropidophis, and Ungaliophis) have been placed by many systematists in a single group (traditionally called Tropidophiidae). However, the monophyly of this group has been questioned in several studies. Moreover, the overall relationships among basal snake lineages, including the placement of the dwarf boas, are poorly understood. We obtained mtDNA sequence data for 12S, 16S, and intervening tRNA–val genes from 23 species of snakes representing most major snake lineages, including all four genera of New World dwarf boas. We then examined the phylogenetic position of these species by estimating the phylogeny of the basal snakes. Our phylogenetic analysis suggests that New World dwarf boas are not monophyletic. Instead, we find Exiliboa and Ungaliophis to be most closely related to sand boas (Erycinae), boas (Boinae), and advanced snakes (Caenophidea), whereas Tropidophis and Trachyboa form an independent clade that separated relatively early in snake radiation. Our estimate of snake phylogeny differs significantly in other ways from some previous estimates of snake phylogeny. For instance, pythons do not cluster with boas and sand boas, but instead show a strong relationship with Loxocemus and Xenopeltis. Additionally, uropeltids cluster strongly with Cylindrophis, and together are embedded in what has previously been considered the macrostomatan radiation. These relationships are supported by both bootstrapping (parametric and nonparametric approaches) and Bayesian analysis, although Bayesian support values are consistently higher than those obtained from nonparametric bootstrapping. Simulations show that Bayesian support values represent much better estimates of phylogenetic accuracy than do nonparametric bootstrap support values, at least under the conditions of our study.
S792	J. A. Wilkinson;R. C. Drewes;O. L. Tatum	2002	A molecular phylogenetic analysis of the family Rhacophoridae with an emphasis on the Asian and African genera	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution	24	2	265-273	10.1016/S1055-7903(02)00212-9		Rhacophoridae; Molecular phylogeny; Taxonomy; mtDNA; 12S; 16S rRNA genes; Aglyptodactylus; Boophis; Buergeria; Chirixalus; Chiromantis; Mantella; Mantidactylus; Nyctixalus; Philautus; Polypedates; Rhacophorus; Theloderma	Using characters from mitochondrial DNA to construct maximum parsimony and maximum likelihood trees, we performed a phylogenetic analysis on representative species of 14 genera: 12 that belong to the treefrog family Rhacophoridae and two, Amolops and Rana, that are not rhacophorids. Our results support a phylogenetic hypothesis that depicts a monophyletic family Rhacophoridae. In this family, the Malagasy genera Aglyptodactylus, Boophis, Mantella, and Mantidactylus form a well-supported sister clade to all other rhacophorid genera, and Mantella is the sister taxon to Mantidactylus. Within the Asian/African genera, the genus Buergeria forms a well-supported clade of four species. The genera, except for Chirixalus, are generally monophyletic. An exception to this is that Polypedates dennysii clusters with species of Rhacophorus, suggesting that the taxonomy of the rhacophorids should be revised to reflect this relationship. Chirixalus is not monophyletic. Unexpectedly, there is strong support for Chirixalus doriae from Southeast Asia forming a clade with species of the African genus Chiromantis, suggesting that Chiromantis dispersed to Africa from Asia. Also, there is strong support for the sister taxon relationship of Chirixalus eiffingeri and Chirixalus idiootocus apart from other congeners.
S725	P. Chaverri;L. A. Castlebury;G. J. Samuels;D. M. Geiser	2003	Multilocus phylogenetic structure in the Trichoderma harzianum/Hypocrea lixii complex	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution	27	2	302-313	10.1016/S1055-7903(02)00400-1			Trichoderma harzianum is a ubiquitous species in the environment and is effective in the biological control of plant-pathogenic fungi. T. harzianum has not been linked unequivocally to its sexual state nor has its phylogeny been studied in detail. It has been suggested that T. harzianum is a species complex based on the phenotypic and genotypic variability encountered. On the basis of morphological and cultural characters and DNA sequence data analysis of four genes (ITS rDNA, translation elongation factor 1-α, calmodulin, and α-actin), Hypocrea lixii was found to be the sexual state of T. harzianum. Both the asexual and sexual states of this species have wide geographic distributions. Phylogenetic analysis of four genes showed that T. harzianum/H. lixii is a cohesive group that is supported by bootstrap values higher than 95%. Principles of genealogical concordance indicated that T. harzianum/H. lixii is a complex of independent monophyletic lineages, but no diagnostic morphological distinctions were identified that justify formal taxonomic recognition for the different lineages.
S931	G. Hao;Y. M. Yuan;C. M. Hu;X. J. Ge;N. X. Zhao	2003	Molecular phylogeny of Lysimachia (Myrsinaceae) based on chloroplast trnL-F and nuclear ribosomal ITS sequences	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution							Both nuclear ribosomal ITS and chloroplast trnL-F sequences were acquired for 57 species (accessions) of Lysimachia and its close relatives, and were analyzed together with sequences retrieved from databases. The results of phylogenetic analyses based on these data (separately or combined) show that Lysimachia is paraphyletic, with the monotypic genus Glaux nested deeply inside. Previous suggestions that Anagallis and Trientalis could be ingroups of Lysimachia were not corroborated by our results. The molecular phylogenies do not support the current infrageneric divisions of Lysimachia. Subgenus Lysimachia contains at least five independent lineages. The Hawaii endemic subgenus Lysimachiopsis was shown to group with subgenera Palladia and Heterostylandra, instead of subgenus Idiophyton as previously suggested. The two North American representatives of Lysimachia, subgenus Seleucia and section Verticillatae of subgenus Lysimachia are group together as the most basal clade of the genus. Parallel and independent evolutions were inferred for morphological characters that were previously used as diagnostic criteria. Molecular phylogenies do not offer clear inferences on the overall historical biogeography of Lysimachia, but Southeast Asia origins of several clades, including the Hawaiian endemic clade and the Iberian L. ephemerum are strongly supported.
S980	M. D. Herron;T. A. Castoe;C. L. Parkinson	2003	Sciurid phylogeny and the paraphyly of Holarctic ground squirrels (Spermophilus)	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution							The squirrel family, Sciuridae, is one of the largest and most widely dispersed families of mammals. In spite of the wide distribution and conspicuousness of this group, phylogenetic relationships remain poorly understood. We used DNA sequence data from the mitochondrial cytochrome b gene of 114 species in 21 genera to infer phylogenetic relationships among sciurids based on maximum parsimony and Bayesian phylogenetic methods. Although we evaluated more complex alternative models of nucleotide substitution to reconstruct Bayesian phylogenies, none provided a better fit to the data than the GTR+G+I model. We used the reconstructed phylogenies to evaluate the current taxonomy of the Sciuridae. At essentially all levels of relationships, we found the phylogeny of squirrels to be in substantial conflict with the current taxonomy. At the highest level, the flying squirrels do not represent a basal divergence, and the current division of Sciuridae into two subfamilies is therefore not phylogenetically informative. At the tribal level, the Neotropical pygmy squirrel, Sciurillus, represents a basal divergence and is not closely related to the other members of the tribe Sciurini. At the genus level, the sciurine genus Sciurus is paraphyletic with respect to the dwarf squirrels (Microsciurus), and the Holarctic ground squirrels (Spermophilus) are paraphyletic with respect to antelope squirrels (Ammospermophilus), prairie dogs (Cynomys), and marmots (Marmota). Finally, several species of chipmunks and Holarctic ground squirrels do not appear monophyletic, indicating a need for reevaluation of alpha taxonomy.
S818	L. Myllys;S. Stenroos;A. Thell;T. Ahti	2003	Phylogeny of bipolar Cladonia arbuscula and Cladonia mitis (Lecanorales, Euascomycetes)	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution	27	1	58-69	10.1016/S1055-7903(02)00398-6			Phylogenetic relationships and levels of geographic differentiation of two closely related bipolar taxa, Cladonia arbuscula and Cladonia mitis, were cladistically examined with ITS regions, SSU rDNA introns, partial β-tubulin, and partial glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) genes. In the combined analysis of the four genes, C. arbuscula was paraphyletic, while C. mitis, nested within C. arbuscula, formed a strongly supported monophyletic group. C. arbuscula samples were divided into three separate clades: “arbuscula I,” appearing as basal to the other ingroup taxa, “arbuscula II,” and “arbuscula III” (the latter represented by only one specimen), which were not correlated with any morphological trait. Only C. mitis specimens formed a morphologically and chemically distinct group. None of the main clades was correlated with geographic origin. The separate analyses were poorly resolved, and in most cases samples from “arbuscula I,” “arbuscula II,” and “arbuscula III” clades were intermixed. An incongruence test revealed conflict among the four gene regions in almost all cases. Only ITS regions and introns were not significantly incongruent, suggesting lack of recombination within the ribosomal DNA locus. Incomplete lineage sorting and recombination were considered to be the main reasons accounting for the incongruencies. The high proportion of shared polymorphisms between the “arbuscula I” and “arbuscula II” clades, especially found from the β-tubulin gene and from the ITS regions, and the lack of corroborating morphological characters both indicate a short history of reproductive isolation among the groups. The lack of genetic differentiation among the northern and southern samples within the main clades indicates a relatively recent gene flow, which may have resulted from migrations during the Pleistocene glaciations or from more recent long-distance dispersal.
S971	S. Oh;D. Potter	2003	Phylogenetic utility of the second intron of <i>LEAFY</i> in <i>Neillia</i> and <i>Stephanandra</i> (Rosaceae) and implications for the origin of <i>Stephanandra</i>	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution	29		203-215				A homeotic gene, <i>LEAFY</i>, has been suggested to be a single-copy gene in diploid angiosperms. Nucleotide sequences of the second intron of this gene, along with those of several regions of the chloroplast genome (<i>trnL-trnF, trnD-trnY-trnE-trnT</i>, and <i>matK-trnK</i>) and nuclear ribosomal ITS, were obtained from the species of <i>Neillia</i> and <i>Stephanandra</i> to examine the phylogenetic utility of the intron and to elucidate the phylogenetic relationships among species of the two genera. PCR amplification of the second intron of <i>LEAFY</i> using universal degenerate primers produced PCR products in sufficient quantity for successful direct sequencing. The length of the intron ranged from 591 to 622 base pairs (bp) in <i>Neillia</i> and <i>Stephanandra</i>, except in <i>N. thibetica</i> (ca. 1370 bp), and sequence analysis of this region from multiple accessions revealed low levels of infraspecific variation. Comparison of the <i>LEAFY</i> data with ITS and cpDNA data demonstrated that the <i>LEAFY</i> intron was the most variable and useful for phylogenetic analysis at the species level, providing many more phylogenetically informative characters per 100 bp (7.4) than either ITS (3.2) or cpDNA (0.7). Phylogenetic analyses of <i>LEAFY</i> data using both maximum parsimony and likelihood methods generated well supported and highly resolved gene trees with few homoplasies (CI = 0.97). <i>Stephanandra</i> is monophyletic and is nested within <i>Neillia</i> in both <i>LEAFY</i> and cpDNA trees, while the relationship is poorly resolved by ITS data. <i>LEAFY</i> and cpDNA data, however, strongly conflicted with each other with respect to the position of <i>Stephanandra</i>: <i>LEAFY</i> trees placed <i>Stephanandra</i> as sister to the ((<i>N. affinis, N. gracilis</i>), <i>N. thyrsiflora</i>) clade whereas cpDNA data suggested <i>Stephanandra</i> is sister to <i>N. uekii</i>. Both gene trees, however, are nearly identical to each other when <i>Stephanandra</i> is excluded. A hybrid origin of <i>Stephanandra</i> is suggested as a plausible hypothesis to explain the incongruence between <i>LEAFY</i> and cpDNA data sets, though gene duplication/loss and lineage sorting events cannot be ruled out as possibilities.
S793	A. Rokas;G. Melika;Y. Abe;J. L. Nieves-Aldrey;J. M. Cook;G. N. Stone	2003	Lifecycle closure, lineage sorting and hybridization revealed in a phylogenetic analysis of European oak gallwasps (Hymenoptera: Cynipidae: Cynipini) using mitochondrial sequence data	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution	26	1	36-45	10.1016/S1055-7903(02)00329-9		Gallwasp; Cynipidae; Cynipini; Lineage sorting; Lifecycle; Likelihood; Bayesian inference; Cytochrome b; Hybridization; Insect systematics	Oak gallwasps are cyclically parthenogenetic insects that induce a wide diversity of highly complex species- and generation-specific galls on oaks and other Fagaceae. Phylogenetic relationships within oak gallwasps remain to be established, while sexual and parthenogenetic generations of many species remain unpaired. Previous work on oak gallwasps has revealed substantial intra-specific variation, particularly between regions known to represent discrete Pleistocene glacial refuges. Here we use statistical phylogenetic inference methods on sequence data for a fragment of the mitochondrial cytochrome b gene to reconstruct the relationships among 62 oak gallwasp species. For 16 of these we also include 23 additional cytochrome b haplotype sequences from different Pleistocene refuge areas to test the effect of intra-specific variation on inter-specific phylogeny reconstruction. The reconstructed phylogenies show good intra-generic resolution and identify several conserved clades, but fail to reconstruct either very recent or very ancient divergences. Nine of the 16 species represented by multiple haplotypes are not monophyletic. The apparent discordance between the recovered gene tree and the current taxonomic classification can be explained through (a) collapsing of some species currently known only from either a sexual or a parthenogenetic generation into a single cyclically parthenogenetic entity; (b) sorting of ancestral polymorphism in diverging lineages, and (c) horizontal transfer of haplotypes, perhaps due to hybridization within glacial refuges. Our conclusions emphasise the need for careful intra-specific sampling when reconstructing phylogenies for radiations of closely related species and imply that for certain taxonomic groups full phylogenetic resolution (using molecular markers) may not be attainable.
S853	J. A. Sanchez;D. J. Taylor	2003	Phylogenetic Analyses Among Octocorals (Cnidaria): Mitochondrial and Nuclear DNA Sequences (lsu-rRNA, 16S and ssu-rRNA, 18S) Support Two Convergent Clades of Branching Gorgonians	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution							Gorgonian octocorals lack corroborated hypotheses of phylogeny. This study reconstructs genealogical relationships among some octocoral species based on published DNA sequences from the large ribosomal subunit of the mitochondrial RNA (lsu-rRNA, 16S: 524 bp and 21 species) and the small subunit of the nuclear RNA (ssu-rRNA, 18S: 1815 bp and 13 spp) using information from insertions-deletions (INDELS) and the predicted secondary structure of the lsu-rRNA (16S). There were seven short (3-10 bp) INDELS in the 18S with consistent phylogenetic information. The INDELS in the 16Scorresponded to informative signature sequences homologous to the G13 helix found in Escherichia coli. We found two main groups of gorgonian octocorals using a maximum parsimony analysis of the two genes. One group corresponds to deep-water taxa including species from the suborders Calcaxonia and Scleraxonia characterized by an enlargement of the G13 helix. The second group has species from Alcyoniina, Holaxonia and again Scleraxonia characterized by insertions in the 18S. Gorgonian corals, branching colonies with a gorgonin-containing flexible multilayered axis (Holaxonia and Calcaxonia), are a polyphyletic set of species. These corroborated results from maternally inherited (16S) and biparentally inherited (18S) genes support a hypothesis of parallel evolution of branching in the two octocoral clades.
S903	G. M. Schneeweiss;A. Colwell;J. M. Park;C. G. Jang;T. F. Stuessy	2003	Phylogeny of holoparasitic Orobanche (Orobanchaceae) inferred from nuclear ITS-sequences	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution	30		465-470				Orobanche is the largest genus among the holoparasitic members of Orobanchaceae. We present the first molecular phylogenetic analysis (using nuclear ITS-sequences) that includes members of all sections of Orobanche, Gymnocaulis, Myzorrhiza, Trionychon, and Orobanche. Orobanche is not monophyletic, but falls into two lineages: (1) the Orobanche-group comprises Orobanche sect. Orobanche and the small Near Asian genus Diphelypaea and is characterized by a chromosome base number of x = 19; (2) the Phelipanche-group contains Orobanche sects. Gymnocaulis, Myzorrhiza, and Trionychon and possesses a chromosome base number of x = 12. The relationships between these two groups and to other genera such as Boschniakia or Cistanche remain unresolved. Within the Orobanche-group, O. macrolepis and O. anatolica (including O. colorata) constitute two phylogenetically distinct lineages. Intrasectional structurings proposed by some authors for O. sect. Orobanche are not confirmed by the molecular data. In most cases, intraspecific sequence divergence between accessions, if present, is negligible and not correlated with morphological or ecological traits. In a few cases, however, there is evidence for the presence of cryptic taxa.
S838	D. A. Steane;K. L. Wilson;R. S. Hill	2003	Using matK sequence data to unravel the phylogeny of Casuarinaceae	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution							Casuarinaceae are a Gondwanic family with a unique combination of morphological characters not comparable to any other family. Until recently, the 96 species in the family were classified in a single genus, Casuarina s.l. A recent morphological revision of the family resulted in the splitting of Casuarina s.l. into four genera - Allocasuarina, Casuarina s.s., Ceuthostoma and Gymnostoma. This study uses matK sequence data from 78 species of Casuarinaceae and eight potential outgroup taxa to examine the phylogenetic structure within the Casuarinaceae. The study demonstrates the monophyly of the four genera and examines the sister group relationships within the family; it tests the validity of the infra-generic subdivision of Allocasuarina; it discovers geography-based infra-generic subdivisions within Gymnostoma and Casuarina; and, finally, provides a molecular framework on which to trace the evolution of xeromorphy in the Casuarinaceae.
S920	S. J. Steppam;B. L. Storz;R. S. Hoffmann	2003	Nuclear DNA phylogeny of the squirrels (Mammalia: Rodentia) and the evolution of arboreality using c-myc and RAG1	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution							The family Sciuridae includes some of the most familiar species of small mammals and is one of the largest mammalian families. However, phylogenetic analyses are scarce. We report on a comprehensive molecular phylogeny for the family. Two nuclear genes (c-myc and RAG1) comprising approximately 4,500 bp of data (most of which reside in exons) are applied for the first time to rodent phylogenetics. Parsimony, likelihood, and Bayesian analyses of the separate gene regions and combined data reveal the presence of five major lineages and reject the conventional elevation of the flying squirrels (Pteromyinae) to one of the two subfamilies. Instead, flying squirrels are derived from one of the tree squirrel lineages. C-myc indels corroborate the sequence based topologies. The common ancestor of extant squirrels appears to have been arboreal, confirming the fossil evidence. The results also reveal an unexpected clade of mostly terrestrial squirrels with African and Holarctic centers of diversity. Our results demonstrate the phylogenetic utility of relatively slowly evolving nuclear exonic data even for relatively recent clades such as rodent families.
S993	T. P. Wilcox;F. J. Garcia de Leon;D. A. Hendrickson;D. M. Hillis	2003	Convergence among cave catfishes: long-branch attraction and a Bayesian relative rates test	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution							Convergence has long been of interest to evolutionary biologists. Cave organisms appear to be ideal candidates for studying convergence in morphological, physiological and developmental traits. Here we report apparent convergence in two cave-catfishes that were described on morphological grounds as congeners: Prietella phreatophila and P. lundbergi. We collected mitochondrial DNA sequence data from 10 species of catfishes, representing five of the seven genera in Ictaluridae, as well as seven species from a broad range of siluriform outgroups. Analysis of the sequence data under parsimony supports a monophyletic Prietella. However, both maximum-likelihood and Bayesian analyses support polyphyly of the genus, with P. lundbergi sister to Ictalurus and P. phreatophila sister to Ameiurus. The topological difference between parsimony and the other methods appears to result from long-branch attraction between the Prietella species. Similarly, the sequence data do not support several other relationships within Ictaluridae supported by morphology. We develop a new Bayesian method for examining variation in molecular rates of evolution across a phylogeny.
S1647	G. J. Allan;J. Francisco-Ortega;A. Santos-Guerra;E. Boerner;E. A. Zimmer	2004	Molecular Phylogenetic Evidence for the Geographic Origin and Classification of Canary Island Lotus (Fabaceae: Loteae)	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution	32	1	123-138	10.1016/j.ympev.2003.11.018			Molecular phylogenetic analyses of Macaronesian Lotus and related genera were conducted to assess their biogeographic history and taxonomy. Macaronesian Lotus, which are typically classified within one of two subgenera, Lotus subgenus Pedrosia or L. subg. Rhyncholotus, are diagnosed by the presence of a forked or toothed style and slight differences in corolla morphology. Maximum parsimony and Bayesian analyses of internal transcribed spacer sequences identify a well-supported northwest African-Cape Verde Island clade that includes all members of Lotus subgenus Pedrosia + L. subg. Rhyncholotus. There is modest support for two independently nested clades containing the Canary Island species and two non-Canarian species, L. assakensis from Africa and L. azoricus endemic to the Azores. Biogeographic reconstruction based on a parsimony topology unequivocally identifies an African origin for the Canary Island group with subsequent back dispersal to the African continent and a single dispersal event to the Azores. A phylogeographic assessment of colonization and diversification patterns suggests that geographic isolation via interisland colonization of ecologically similar habitats is the primary mode of species diversification in Canary Island Lotus.
S1117	C. D. Bell	2004	Preliminary phylogeny of Valerianaceae (Dipsacales) inferred from nuclear and chloroplast DNA sequence data	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution	31		340-350				Valerianaceae is a relatively small (ca. 350 species), but morphologically diverse angiosperm lineage. Sequence data from the entire ndhF gene, the trnL-F intergenic spacer region, the trnL intron, the matK region, the rbcL- atpB intergenic spacer region and internal transcribed spacer (ITS) region of nuclear ribosomal DNA were collected for 21 taxa within Dipsacaceae and Valerianaceae (1 and 20, respectively). These data were included in several phylogenetic analyses with previously published sequences from Dipsacales. Results from these analyses (maximum parsimony, maximum likelihood, and Bayesian analysis) are in strong agreement with many of the conclusions from previous studies, most importantly: 1) Valerianaceae is sister to Dipsacaceae; 2) Triplostegia is more closely related to species of Dipsacaceae than to Valerianaceae, and 3) Valeriana appears not to be monophyletic, with Valeriana celtica falling outside the remainder of the species of Valeriana sampled here (with very strong support). With the exception of Valeriana celtica, these data support two major clades within Valeriana; one that is exclusively New World and another that is distributed in both the Old and New World. Although the species of Valerianaceae and its sister group Dipsacaceae plus Triplostegia, are widely distributed in the Northern Hemisphere, and the data imply that Valerianaceae diversified initially in Asia (the Himalayan Patrinia and Nardostachys falling at the base of the clade), the center of modern species diversity for the group is in the Andes of South America with as many as 175 species restricted to that region. Although the exclusively South American taxa form a clade in the chloroplast and combined ITS and chloroplast analyses, support values tend to be low. Future studies will need to include additional data, in the form of both characters and taxa, before any strong conclusions about the character evolution, diversification, and biogeography of the South American valerians can be made.
S1112	P. Bodensteiner;M. Binder;D. S. Hibbett	2004	Phylogenetic diversity of cyphelloid fungi in the euagarics clade	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution							The homobasidiomycetes includes the mushroom-forming fungi. Members of the homobasidiomycetes produce the largest, most complex fruiting bodies in the fungi, such as gilled mushrooms ("agarics"), polypores, and puffballs. The homobasidiomycetes also includes species that produce minute, cup- or tube-shaped "cyphelloid" fruiting bodies, which rarely exceed 1-2 mm diameter. The goal of this study was to estimate the phylogenetic placements of cyphelloid fungi within the homobasidiomycetes. Sequences of nuclear large subunit (nuc-lsu) ribosomal DNA (rDNA), 5.8S rDNA, and internal transcribed spacers 1 and 2 were obtained from 31 isolates of cyphelloid fungi and 16 isolates of other homobasidiomycetes, and combined with published sequences. In total, 46 isolates of cyphelloid fungi were included, representing 16 genera. Preliminary phylogenetic analyses of a 1477-sequence dataset and BLAST searches using sequences of cyphelloid forms as queries were used to identify taxa that could be close relatives of cyphelloid forms. Subsequent phylogenetic analyses of one dataset with 209 isolates represented by nuc-lsu rDNA sequences (analyzed with parsimony) and another with 38 isolates represented by nuc-lsu and 5.8S rDNA sequences (analyzed with parsimony and maximum likelihood) indicated that cyphelloid forms represent a polyphyletic assemblage of reduced agarics (euagarics clade, Agaricales). Unconstrained topologies suggest that there have been about 10-12 origins of cyphelloid forms, but evaluation of constrained topologies with the Shimodaira-Hasegawa test suggest that somewhat more parsimonious scenarios cannot be rejected. Whatever their number, the independent origins of cyphelloid forms represent striking cases of parallel evolutionary reduction.
S1217	T. Galewski;J. F. Mauffrey;Y. L. R. Leite;J. L. Patton;E. J. P. Douzery	2004	Ecomorphological diversification among South American spiny rats (Rodentia; Echimyidae): a phylogenetic and chronological approach	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution							The phylogeny of South American spiny rats (Rodentia; Echimyida) was studied using the exon 28 of the von Willebrand Factor nuclear gene (vWF). Sequences were analysed separately and in combination with a mitochondrial dataset (cyt b, rRNAs 12S and 16S) used in previous publications. The basal polytomy of echimyids was partially resolved and unexpected intergeneric clades were recovered. Thus, the intimate nested position of Myocastor within echimyids is evidenced. A well-supported clade is identified, including all the arboreal genera, and a group formed by Myocastor, Thrichomys and Proechimys + Hoplomys. The clustering of Euryzygomatomys + Clyomys with Trinomys is also suggested. On the opposite, the phylogenetic position of Capromys as well as the relationships among arboreal genera remain unclear. Molecular divergence times were estimated using a Bayesian relaxed molecular clock and suggest a Middle Miocene origin for most of modern genera. The ecomorphological diversification of echimyids is discussed in the light of these new results and past environmental modifications in South America.
S1186	D. M. Hillis;T. P. Wilcox	2004	Phylogeny of New World True Frogs (Rana)	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution							Phylogenetic relationships among the species of true frogs (Rana) from North, South, and Central America were investigated based on the sequences of approximately 2 kb from the mitochondrial genome, sampled from most of the described species, as well as eight undescribed species. This analysis, combined with previous studies of the phylogeny of New World Rana, served as the basis for a revised classification of the group. The American species of Rana are not monophyletic; the western North American Amerana is more closely related to the R. temporaria group of Eurasia (together, these frogs form the group Laurasiarana). The remaining species from the Americas form the monophyletic group Novirana, which includes: R. sylvatica; Aquarana (the R. catesbeiana group); Ranula (the R. palmipes group, including the mostly upland Levirana species and the mostly lowland Lithobates species); Torrentirana (the R. tarahumarae group, or Zweifelia, plus R. sierramadrensis), Stertirana (the R. montezumae group, or Lacusirana, plus R. pipiens), Nenirana (the R. areolata group), and Scurrilirana (most of the southern and tropical leopard frogs). The mitochondrial sequences supported many of the previous hypotheses of relationships of New World Rana, although there were some differences involving the placement of the species R. pipiens, R. sierramadrensis, and R. sylvatica. Parametric bootstrap analyses indicated significant support for the relationships inferred from the mtDNA sequences, and rejected the previous hypotheses of relationships for these three species.
S1192	J. Hyvönen;S. Koskinen;G. L. S. Merrill;T. A. Hedderson;S. Stenroos	2004	Phylogeny of the Polytrichales (Bryophyta) based on simultaneous analysis of molecular and morphological data	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution							Phylogenetic analyses on Polytrichales were conducted using morphology and sequence data from the chloroplast genes rbcL and rps4 plus the trnL-F gene region, part of the mitochondrial nad5 and the nuclear-encoded 18S rRNA. Our analyses included 46 species representing all genera of Polytrichales. Phylogenetic trees were constructed with simultaneous parsimony analyses of all sequences plus morphology and separate combinations of sequence data only. Results lend support for recognition of Polytrichales as a monophyletic entity. Oedipodium griffithianum appears as a sister taxon to Polytrichales or as a sister taxon of all mosses excluding Sphagnales and Andreaeles. Within Polytrichales Alophosia and Atrichopsis, species without the adaxial lamellae (in Atrichopsis present but poorly developed on male gametophyte) otherwise typical of the group, are sister to the remaining species followed by a clade including Bartramiopsis and Lyellia, species with adaxial lamellae covering only the central portion of the leaves. Six taxa with an exclusively southern hemisphere distribution form a grade between the basal lineages and a clade including genera that are mostly confined to the northern hemisphere.
S1051	M. Kennedy;H. G. Spencer	2004	Phylogenies of the Frigatebirds (Fregatidae) and Tropicbirds (Phaethonidae), two divergent groups of the traditional order Pelecaniformes, inferred from mitochondrial DNA sequences	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution	31		31-38				The frigatebirds (Fregatidae) and Tropicbirds (Phaethonidae) represent the most morphologically and behaviorally distinct members of the traditional Order Pelecaniformes. Using 1756 bp of mitochondrial DNA sequence consisting of the 12S, ATPase-6, ATPase-8, and COI genes obtained from all extant species, we derive a completely resolved phylogeny for both groups. The inferred relationships among these species are robust to the method of phylogenetic estimation used, and all branches are well supported, in spite of the relatively recent radiation within the frigatebirds. The two families are not closely related either to each other, or to any other putative relatives (e.g., pelicans; Pelecanidae).
S2043	J. F. Manen;C. Habashi;D. Jeanmonod;J. M. Park;G. M. Schneeweiss	2004	Phylogeny and intraspecific variability of holoparasitic Orobanche (Orobanchaceae) inferred from plastid rbcL sequences	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution	33		482-500				The rbcL sequences of 106 specimens representing 28 species of the four recognized sections of Orobanche were analyzed and compared. Most sequences represent pseudogenes with high rates of non-synonymous substitutions and indel formation. This study confirms that the American lineage (sects. Gymnocaulis and Myzorrhiza) contains potentially functional rbcL-copies with intact open reading frames and low rate of non-synonymous substitutions. For the first time, this is also shown for a member of the Eurasian lineage, O. coerulescens of sect. Orobanche, while all other investigated species of sects. Orobanche and Trionychon contain pseudogenes with distorted reading frames and significantly higher rates of non-synonymous substitutions. Phylogenetic analyses of the rbcL sequences indicate that the genus Orobanche is not monophyletic, and that the American lineage might be more closely related to Boschniakia and Cistanche than to the other sections of Orobanche. Additionally, species of sect. Trionychon phylogenetically nest in sect. Orobanche. This is in concordance with results from other plastid markers (rps2 and matK), but in disagreement with other molecular (nuclear ITS), morphological, and karyological data. This might indicate that the ancestor of sect. Trionychon has captured the plastid genome or aprts of it of a member of sect. Orobanche. Apart from the phylogenetically problematic position of sect. Trionychon, the phylogenetic relationships within sect. Orobanche are similar to those inferred from nuclear ITS data and are close to the traditional groupings traditionally recognized based on morphology. The intraspecific variation of rbcL is low and is neither correlated with intraspecific morphological variability nor with host range. Ancestral character reconstruction using parsimony suggests that the ancestor of O. sect. Orobanche had a narrow host range.
S1052	P. B. Matheny	2004	Improving phylogenetic inference of mushrooms using RPB1 and RPB2 nucleotide sequences (Inocybe; Agaricales)	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution							Approximately 3000 bp across 84 taxa have been sequenced for variable regions of RPB1, RPB2, and nLSU-rDNA to infer phylogenetic relationships in the large ectomycorrhizal mushroom genus Inocybe (Agaricales; Basidiomycota). This study represents the first effort to combine variable regions of RPB1 and RPB2 with nLSU-rDNA for low-level phylogenetic studies in mushroom-forming fungi. Combination of the three loci increases non-parametric bootstrap support, Bayesian likelihood posterior probabilities, and resolution for numerous clades compared to separate gene analyses. These data suggest the evolution of at least five major lineages in Inocybeóthe Inocybe clade, the Mallocybe clade, the Auritella clade, the Inosperma clade, and the Pseudosperma clade. Additionally, many clades nested within each major lineage are strongly supported. These results also suggest the family Crepiodataceae sensu stricto is sister to Inocybe. Recognition of Inocybe at the family level, the Inocybaceae, is recommended.
S1162	J. A. Schulte Ii;J. R. Macey;T. J. Papenfuss	2004	A genetic perspective on the geographic association of taxa among arid North American lizards of the Sceloporus magister complex	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution							none
S1002	P. Q. Spinks;H. B. Shaffer;W. P. McCord;J. B. Iverson	2004	Phylogenetic hypotheses for the turtle family Geoemydidae	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution							The turtle family Geoemydidae represents the largest, most diverse, and most poorly understood family of turtles. Little is known about this group, including intrafamilial systematics. The only complete phylogenetic hypothesis for this family positions geoemydids as paraphyletic with respect to tortoises, but this arrangement has not been accepted by many workers. We compiled a 79-taxon mitochondrial and nuclear DNA data set to reconstruct phylogenetic relationships for 65 species and subspecies representing all 23 genera of the Geoemydidae. Maximum parsimony (MP) and maximum-likelihood (ML) analyses and Bayesian analysis produced similar, well-resolved trees. Our analyses identified three main clades comprising the tortoises (Testudinidae), the old-world Geoemydidae, and the South American geoemydid genus Rhinoclemmys. Within Geoemydidae, many nodes were strongly supported, particularly based on Bayesian posterior probabilities of the combined three-gene dataset. We found that adding data for a subset of taxa improved resolution of some deeper nodes in the tree. Several strongly supported groupings within the Geoemydidae demonstrate nonmonophyly of some genera and possible interspecific hybrids, and we recommend several taxonomic revisions based on available evidence.
S1200	D. R. Uit de Weerd;W. H. Piel;E. Gittenberger	2004	Widespread polyphyly among Alopiinae snail genera: when phylogeny mirrors biogeography more closely than morphology	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution	33		533-548				Consider a group of species that is evenly divided by an easily identifiable complex morphological character. Most biologists would assume that this character should provide better phylogenetic information than, say, the spatial distribution of these species over a fairly continuous 500-km radius area. Paradoxically, this is not the case among terrestrial snail genera in the clausiliid subfamily Alopiinae. Phylogenetic analysis using the nuclear markers ITS1/ITS2 and mitochondrial markers COI/12S reveals widespread homoplasy in the clausilial apparatus (a complex aperture-closing mechanism), and concomitant extensive polyphyly among Carinigera, Isabellaria, and Sericata. In contrast, phylogenetic relationships as revealed by molecular data are closely congruent with biogeography at a relatively small scale. A combination of extremely low vagility and extremely high morphological convergence has conspired to produce this unexpected result. Implications as to the function of the clausilial apparatus are discussed.
S1014	Y. Weimin;R. M. Giblin-Davis;H. Braasch;K. Morris;W. K. Thomas	2004	Phylogenetic relationships among Bursaphelenchus species (Nematoda: Parasitaphelenchidae) inferred from nuclear ribosomal and mitochondrial DNA sequence	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution							A phylogenetic analysis using DNA sequences of the nuclear small and large subunit ribosomal RNA genes and mitochondrial cytochrome oxidase subunit I was performed. The analysis included individuals from 37 populations of 20 Bursaphelenchus species from Europe, North America, Central America and Asia representing much of the known biological diversity in this genus. Phylogenetic analysis, using several methods of inference based on SSR, LSU and mtCOI 0-fold degenerate sequences were congruent, with the greatest resolution obtained with combined datasets. Phylogenetic analysis revealed B. abruptus as the basal taxon among all investigated Bursaphelenchus species and a large number of significantly supported monophyletic groups. These clades are largely consistent with morphological and life history variation in the genus. Phylogenetic analysis of LSU rDNA sequences revealed the existence of cryptic species of B. mucronatus, B xylophilus and B. sexdentati. One monotypic genus, Rhadinaphelenchus (Hunt, 1993) (=B. cocophilus [Cobb, 1919] Baujard, 1989) was found to be included significantly within the Bursaphelenchus radiation. The molecular phylogeny also supports the novel nature of three previously unnamed species. While SSU, LSU and mtCOI gene sequences are useful for inferring phylogenetic relationships in this analysis, the LSU dataset was most informative across this genus. The mtDNA data was severely limited by non-stationary base composition and apparent saturation above the species level, and the conservative evolution of the SSU data limited the number of phylogenetically informative sites derived from that dataset.
S1070	R. C. Winkworth;M. J. Donoghue	2004	Viburnum phylogeny: evidence from the duplicated nuclear gene GBSSI	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution							DNA sequencing studies of the granule-bound starch synthase gene (GBSSI) indicate the presence of two loci in Viburnum. Gene trees from separate and combined phylogenetic analysis of these loci are generally congruent with each other and with trees from previous analyses, especially those of Donoghue et al. (2004) based on nuclear ribosomal ITS and chloroplast trnK intron DNA sequences. Specifically, our GBSSI trees confirm (i) the monophyly of some and non-monophyly of other traditionally recognized taxonomic sections, (ii) the presence of three major supra-sectional lineages within Viburnum, and (iii) the resolution of many species relationships within the section-level clades. Basal relationships within Viburnum remain uncertain; in particular, the position of the root, relationships among the supra-sectional clades, and the exact placement of several smaller groups (e.g. V. clemensiae, V. urceolatum, and section Pseudotinus). In two lineages each of the GBSSI paralogues is represented by two distinct sequences. The presence of additional copies appears to be correlated with polyploidy in these two clades and the placement of the homoeologues in gene trees suggests the possibility of a hybrid origin for each polyploid lineage.
S1127	G. Worheide;S. A. Nichols;J. Goldberg	2004	Intragenomic variation of the rDNA internal transcribed spacers in sponges (Phylum Porifera): implications for phylogenetic studies	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution							The internal transcribed spacer regions (ITS1 and ITS2) of the tandemly repeated nuclear ribosomal DNA clusters are frequently used as markers for fine scale analyses in diverse animals. In certain taxa, ITS is nearly exclusively used for population level or inter-specific studies, despite the frequent presence of divergent paralogs within individual genomes that can be phylogenetically confounding. For the first time, we survey diverse marine sponges to determine the extent and phylogenetic implications of intragenomic polymorphisms (IGPs) exhibited at their ITS loci. We discover that the extent of IGP varies greatly between taxa (with most taxa exhibiting very few) and cannot be predicted by taxonomy. Furthermore, we demonstrate that ITS can be phylogenetically informative between species when moderate levels of IGPs are detected, but that ITS paralogy can interfere with population level studies. We caution against the routine use of ITS in phylogenetic studies of sponges without 1) screening for IGPs in every specimen sampled; 2) including all divergent paralogs in phylogenetic analyses; 3) testing ITS data using other single-copy, unlinked loci (such as nuclear introns).
S1039	W. Ye;C. L. Lee;R. H. Scheffrahn;J. M. Aleong;N. Y. Su;G. W. Bennett;M. E. Scharf	2004	Phylogenetic relationships of nearctic Reticulitermes species (Isoptera: Rhinotermitidae) with particular reference to Reticulitermes arenincola Goellner	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution	30	3	815-822				DNA sequence comparisons of the mitochondrial COII, 16S, and 12S rRNA genes were used to infer phylogenetic relationships among the six known US Reticulitermes species (Reticulitermes flavipes, Reticulitermes arenincola, Reticulitermes tibialis, Reticulitermes hageni, Reticulitermes virginicus, and Reticulitermes hesperus) and the closely related European species Reticulitermes santonensis. The interspecific pairwise sequence divergence, based on uncorrected p distance, varied up to 10% across the COII, 4.9% across the 16S, and 3% across the 12S fragments. Phylogenetic trees were constructed using maximum parsimony, likelihood, and distance methods. The combined results suggest several phylogenetic relationships including: (i) R. flavipes, R. arenincola, and European R. santonensis are possibly conspecific; (ii) R. virginicus and R. hageni are closely related species; and (iii) R. tibialis and R. hesperus are closely related species. Interestingly, while there is apparent synonymity between R. flavipes and R. arenincola by DNA sequence, there are clear morphological differences in the soldier caste. This finding suggests a combination of molecular and morphological approaches are necessary for accurate species identification. These data lend resolution to the complex problem of Reticulitermes systematics, and will assist future efforts directed toward characterizing species distribution and ecology. Keywords: Subterranean termite; mtDNA; COII; 12S; 16S; Phylogenetics; Molecular systematics
S1400	O. Blanco;A. Crespo;R. Ree;H. T. Lumbsch	2005	Major clades of parmelioid lichens (Parmeliaceae, Ascomycota) and the evolution of their morphological and chemical diversity	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution							The parmelioid lichens comprise about 1500 species and have a worldwide distribution. Numerous species are widely distributed and well-known, including important bioindicators for atmospheric pollution. The phylogeny and classification of parmelioid lichens has been a matter of debate for several decades. Previous studies using molecular data have helped to establish hypotheses of the phylogeny of certain clades within the parmelioid lichens. In this study, we infer phylogeny of major clades of parmelioid lichens using two nuclear and one mitochondrial loci from 145 specimens (119 species) representing the morphological and chemical diversity in these taxa. A core group of parmelioid lichens is strongly supported as monophyletic, excluding Artoparmelia and Melanelia p.p., and including Parmeliopsis and Parmelaria. Within this group, seven well supported clades are found, but the relationships among them remain unresolved. Stochastic mapping on a MC/MCMC tree sampling was employed to study the evolution of two morphological and two chemical traits that are believed to be important for the successful survival of these lichens, and have also been employed as major characters for classification. The results suggest that these characters have been gained and lost several times during the evolution of parmelioid lichens.
S1234	C. Bleidorn;L. Vogt;T. Bartolomaeus	2005	Molecular Phylogeny of Lugworms (Annelida, Arenicolidae) inferred from three genes	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution	34		673-679				Arenicolids comprise a group of 4 genera in which about 30 nominal species are described. Whereas the biology of many arenicolids is well known, the phylogenetic relationships of these worms are inadequately studied. A close relationship of Arenicolidae and Maldanidae is generally accepted. The phylogenetic relationships of arenicolid taxa were reconstructed based on sequence data of the mitochondrial 16S rRNA gene, the nuclear 18S rRNA gene, and a small fraction of the nuclear 28S rRNA gene. Members of all described arenicolid genera are included in the data set. Phylogenetic analyses were conducted using Maximum Likelihood, Bayesian inference, and Maximum Parsimony. The monophyly of the Maldanidae, as well as of the Arenicolidae is supported by all conducted analyses. Two well supported major clades are highest ranked sister taxa in the Arenicolidae: one containing all Abarenicola species and one containing Arenicola, Arenicolides, and Branchiomaldane. Evidence is given for a closer relationship between the two investigated Branchiomaldane species and Arenicolides ecaudata in the combined analysis. In the light of the molecular data the best explanation for structural and morphological observations is that Branchiomaldane evolved by progenesis.
S1316	L. Braendli;L. J. Handley;P. Vogel;N. Perrin	2005	Evolutionary history of the greater white-toothed shrew (Crocidura russula) inferred from analysis of mtDNA, Y and X chromosome markers	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution							We investigate the evolutionary history of the greater white-toothed shrew across its distribution in Northern Africa and mainland Europe using sex specific (mtDNA and Y chromosome) and biparental (X chromosome) markers. All three loci confirm a large divergence between eastern (Tunisia and Sardinia) and western (Morocco and mainland Europe) lineages, and application of a molecular clock to mtDNA divergence estimates indicates a more ancient separation (2.25 Myr ago) than described by some previous studies, supporting claims for taxonomic revision. Moroccan ancestry for the mainland European population is inconclusive from phylogenetic trees, but is supported by greater nucleotide diversity and a more ancient population expansion in Morocco than in Europe. Signatures of rapid population expansion in mtDNA, combined with low X and Y chromosome diversity, suggest a single colonization of mainland Europe by a small number of Moroccan shrews >38 Kyr ago. This study illustrates that multilocus genetic analyses can facilitate the interpretation of species‚ evolutionary history but that phylogeographic inference using X and Y chromosomes is restricted by low levels of observed polymorphism.
S1249	A. J. Crawford;E. N. Smith	2005	Cenozoic biogeography and evolution in direct-developing frogs of Central America (Leptodactylidae: <i>Eleutherodactylus</i>) as inferred from a phylogenetic analysis of nuclear and mitochondrial genes	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution							We report the first phylogenetic analysis of DNA sequence data for the Central American component of genus <i>Eleutherodactylus</i> (Anura: Leptodactylidae: Eleutherodactylinae), one of the most ubiquitous, diverse, and abundant components of the Neotropical amphibian fauna. We obtained DNA sequence data from 55 specimens representing 45 species. Sampling was focused on Central America, but also included Bolivia, Brazil, Jamaica, and the USA. We sequenced 1460 contiguous base pairs (bp) of the mitochondrial genome containing <i>ND2</i> and five neighboring tRNA genes, plus 1300 bp of the c-<i>myc</i> nuclear gene. The resulting phylogenetic inferences were broadly concordant between data sets and among analytical methods. The subgenus <i>Craugastor</i> is monophyletic and its initial radiation was potentially rapid and adaptive. Within <i>Craugastor</i>, three northern Central American species groups, <i>milesi</i>, <i>augusti</i>, and <i>alfredi</i>, form the sister clades to the rest of <i>Craugastor</i> containing a mix of northern and southern taxa. The <i>rhodopis</i> group is paraphyletic and contains two northern clades and one southern clade. We used a Bayesian MCMC approach together with geological and biogeographic assumptions to estimate divergence times from the combined DNA sequence data. Our results corroborated a model for the origins of <i>Eleutherodactylus</i> in Central America involving three independent dispersal events: the ancestor of <i>Craugastor</i> reaching northern Central America from South American in the early Paleocene, the ancestor of the subgenus <i>Syrrhophus</i> arriving in northern Central America from the Caribbean at the end of the Eocene, and finally a wave of independent dispersal events from South America coinciding with the rise of the Isthmus of Panama during the Pliocene. In addition, our results supported several taxonomic changes; we proposed that the <i>rhodopis</i> group be split into three groups, and the subgenus <i>Craugastor</i> be elevated to the rank of genus.
S1304	N. Devos;S. H. Oh;O. Raspe;A. L. Jacquemart;P. S. Manos	2005	Nuclear ribosomal DNA sequence variation and evolution of spotted marsh-orchids (Dactylorhiza maculata group)	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution							Sequences of both internal and external transcribed spacers of nuclear ribosomal DNA were sequenced for four species belonging to the Dactylorhiza maculata group or ìspotted marsh-Orchidsî. These four species are D. fuchsii, D. saccifera, D. foliosa and D. maculata. Extensive nuclear ribosomal DNA polymorphism was uncovered within the diploid D. fuchsii and the putative autotetraploid D. maculata. Within the phylogenetic trees reconstructed using parsimony and bayesian analyses, four main lineages (A, B, C and D) were well supported. While D. saccifera, D. maculata and D. foliosa were confined to clade B, C and D, respectively, D. fuchsii accessions were spread over three clades (A, B and C). Lineage C, which included accessions of the diploid D. fuchsii and the tetraploid D. maculata, was closely related to the lineage of D. foliosa (lineage D), an endemic diploid species from Madeira. Moreover, intraindividual polymorphism was found within cloned accessions of D. maculata. Both lineages C and A were shown to contribute to the observed intraindividual polymorphism, questioning the putative autopolyploid origin of D. maculata from the diploid D. fuchsii. Evolutionary scenario leading to this extensive nuclear ribosomal DNA polymorphism are discussed in the light of results from maternally inherited chloroplast DNA markers and the autopolyploid of D. maculata from a D. foliosa-like ancestor is postulated.
S1397	N. Devos;S. H. Oh;O. Raspé;D. Tyteca;A. L. Jacquemart	2005	The evolution of Dactylorhiza (Orchidaceae) allotetraploid complex: insights from nrDNA sequences and cpDNA PCR-RFLP data	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution							Sequence data from a portion of the external transcribed spacer (ETS) and from the internal transcribed spacers (ITS1 and ITS2) of 18S-26S nuclear ribosomal DNA were used together with chloroplastic DNA PCR-RFLP data to unravel patterns of allotetraploid speciation within the Western European Dactylorhiza polyploid complex. A maximum likelihood tree based on combined ETS and ITS sequences suggests that the Western European Dactylorhiza allotetraploids have evolved by hybridization between four main diploid lineages. Cloned sequences and the topology of the ITS plus ETS tree indicate that the allotetraploid species D. elata, D. brennensis, and D. sphagnicola have originated from the tetraploid D. maculata together with the diploid D. incarnata lineage, while D. majalis and D. angustata seem to have evolved by hybridization between the D. fuchsii s.str and D. incarnata lineages. Finally, the diploid D. saccifera lineage seems to have been involved together with the D. incarnata lineage in the formation of D. praetermissa. The observed congruence between the chloroplastic tree and the ITS/ETS tree suggests a directional evolution of the nrDNA after polyploidization in favor of the maternal genome. Considered together with morphological, biogeographical and ecological standpoints, the molecular analyses would incline us to recognize four species within the investigated complex, namely D. majalis, D. praetermissa, D. elata and D. sphagnicola.
S1472	A. J. Eckert;B. D. Hall	2005	Phylogeny, historical biogeography, and patterns of diversification for Pinus (Pinaceae) - phylogenetic tests of fossil-based hypotheses	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution							Pines comprise one of the largest coniferous genera, are distributed throughout the Northern Hemisphere, and have an abundant fossil record. Distributions of fossils have been used to derive a three step hypothesis of early pine evolution, which postulates a Mesozoic origin for the genus, east-west expansions across Laurasia, and retraction into Eocene refugia. Here we present phylogenetic tests of this hypothesis using chloroplast sequence data from four loci for 83 pine species. We used the fossil-based hypothesis to derive null expectations concerning monophyly of taxonomic groups, dates of cladogenesis, and patterns of diversification. Phylogenetic analyses using several algorithms subsequently provided rigorous tests of these expectations. Our inferred phylogenies illustrated broad congruence with taxonomic groups, but highlighted consistent problems within subgenus Strobus. Estimated minimum dates of divergence derived from relaxed clock methods were largely consistent with the fossil record and yielded a date for the ingroup node of Pinus of 128 ± 4 million years ago, depending upon the calibration used for subgenus Pinus. Ancestral area reconstructions showed Pinus to have most likely originated in Eurasia. Major clades differed in biogeographic patterns, but were consistent with the fossil-based hypothesis. We found weak support, however, for a change in diversification rate in the Eocene as interpretations of fossil distributions would have predicted.
S1302	W. M. Fischer;J. D. Palmer	2005	Evidence from small-subunit ribosomal RNA sequences for a fungal origin of Microsporidia	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution							The phylum Microsporidia comprises a species-rich group of minute, single-celled, intra-cellular parasites. Lacking normal mitochondria and with unique cytology, microsporidians have sometimes been thought to be a lineage of ancient eukaryotes. Although phylogenetic analyses using small subunit ribosomal RNA (SSU rRNA) genes almost invariably place the Microsporidia among the earliest branches on the eukaryotic tree, many other molecules suggest instead a relationship with fungi. Using maximum likelihood methods and a diverse SSU-rRNA data set, we have re-evaluated the phylogenetic affiliations of Microsporidia. We demonstrate that tree topologies used to estimate likelihood model parameters can materially affect phylogenetic searches. We present a procedure for reducing this bias: "tree-based site partitioning", in which a comprehensive set of alternative topologies is used to estimate sequence data partitions based on inferred evolutionary rates. This hypothesis-driven approach appears to be capable of utilizing phylogenetic information that is not available to standard likelihood implementations (e.g., approximation to a gamma distribution); we have employed it in maximum likelihood and Bayesian analysis. Applying our method to a phylogenetically diverse SSU-rRNA data set revealed that the early diverging ("deep") placement of Microsporidia typically found in SSU-rRNA trees is no better than a fungal placement, and that the likeliest placement of Microsporidia among non-long-branch eukaryotic taxa is actually within Fungi. These results illustrate the importance of hypothesis testing in parameter estimation, provide a way to address certain problems in difficult data sets, and support a fungal origin for the Microsporidia.
S1227	K. Hansen;K. F. LoBuglio;D. H. Pfister	2005	Evolutionary relationships of the cup-fungus genus Peziza and Pezizaceae inferred from multiple nuclear genes: RPB2, Beta-tubulin, and LSU rDNA	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution							To provide a robust phylogeny of Pezizaceae, partial sequences from two nuclear protein-coding genes, RPB2 (encoding the second largest subunit of RNA polymerase II) and ß-tubulin, were obtained from 69 and 72 specimens, respectively, to analyze with nuclear ribosomal large subunit RNA gene sequences (LSU). The three-gene data set includes 32 species of Peziza, and 27 species from 9 additional epigeous and 6 hypogeous (truffle) pezizaceous genera. Analyses of the combined LSU, RPB2, and ß-tubulin data set using parsimony, maximum likelihood, and Bayesian approaches identify fourteen fine-scale lineages within Pezizaceae. Species of Peziza occur in eight of the lineages, spread among other genera of the family, confirming the non-monophyly of the genus. Although parsimony analyses of the three-gene data set produced a nearly completely resolved strict consensus tree, with increased confidence, relationships between the lineages are still resolved with mostly weak bootstrap support. Bayesian analyses of the three-gene data however, show support for several more inclusive clades, mostly congruent with Bayesian analyses of RPB2. No strongly supported incongruence was found among phylogenies derived from the separate LSU, RPB2, and ß-tubulin data sets. The RPB2 region appeared to be the most informative single gene region based on resolution and clade support, and accounts for the greatest number of potentially parsimony informative characters within the combined data set, followed by the LSU and the ß-tubulin region. The results indicate that third codon positions in ß-tubulin are saturated, especially for sites that provide information about the deeper relationships. Nevertheless, almost all phylogenetic signal in ß-tubulin is due to third positions changes, with almost no signal in first and second codons, and contribute phylogenetic information at the „fine-scale‰ level within the Pezizaceae. The Pezizaceae is supported as monophyletic in analyses of the three-gene data set, but its sister-group relationships is not resolved with support. The results advocate the use of RPB2 as a marker for ascomycete phylogenetics at the inter-generic level, whereas the ß-tubulin gene appears less useful.
S1422	G. J. Kergoat;A. Delobel;G. Fédière;B. L. Rü;J. F. Silvain	2005	Both host-plant phylogeny and chemistry have shaped the African seed-beetle radiation	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution	35		602-611				For the last forty years, many authors have attempted to characterize the main patterns of plant-insect evolutionary interactions and understand their causes. In the present work on African seed-beetles (Coleoptera : Bruchidae), we have performed a ten-year field work to sample seeds of more than 300 species of potential host-plants (from the family Fabaceae), to obtain bruchids by rearing. This seed sampling in the field was followed by the monitoring of adult emergences which gave us the opportunity to identify host-plant use accurately. Then, by using molecular phylogenetics (on a combined data-set of four genes), we have investigated the relationships between host-plant preferences and insect phylogeny. Our objectives were to investigate the level of taxonomic conservatism in host-plant fidelity, and host-plant chemistry. Our results indicate that phylogenetically related insects are associated with phylogenetically related host-plants but the phylogeny of the latter cannot alone explain the observed patterns. Major host shifts from Papilionoideae to Mimosoideae subfamilies have happened twice independently suggesting that feeding specialization on a given host-plant group is not always a dead end in seed-beetles. If host-plant taxonomy and chemistry in legumes generally provide consistent data, it appears that the nature of the seed secondary compounds may be the major factor driving the diversification of a large clade specializing on the subfamily Mimosoideae in which host-plant taxonomy is not consistent with chemical similarity.
S1278	J. Lindell;F. R. Méndez-de la Cruz;R. W. Murphy	2005	Deep genealogical history without population differentiation: discordance between mtDNA and allozyme divergence in the zebra tailed lizard (Callisaurus draconoides)	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution							The peninsula of Baja California has a complex geological history that has strongly affected the regional biota. Genealogical histories of many species have revealed congruent patterns, which suggest that the peninsula was temporarily submerged at two locations. We sequenced a total of 1953 base pairs (bp) of the mitochondrial genome for 42 specimens of the zebra tailed lizard (Callisaurus draconoides). The resulting maternal genealogy supports the former existence of a mid peninsular seaway and a Plio Quaternary seaway across the Isthmus of La Paz. In addition, a genealogical break is revealed in the vicinity of Loreto. This genealogical break may have resulted from prolonged submergence of the Loreto Basin during Pliocene. The mid peninsular seaway may have occurred as early as late Miocene, at a time significantly earlier than previously hypothesized. Comparison with other genealogies and geological evidence suggests that current models on the evolution of Baja California‚s fauna are temporally shallow. The deep genealogical patterns of C. draconoides also disagree with the very limited population differentiation previously reported for allozyme markers, suggesting that maternal history may not be an appropriate approximation for population differentiation.
S1373	J. Q. Liu;Y. J. Wang;A. L. Wang;O. Hideaki;R. J. Abbott	2005	Radiation and diversification within the Ligularia-Cremanthodium-Parasenecio complex (Asteraceae) triggered by uplift of the Qinghai-Tibetan Plateau	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution							The Ligularia-Cremanthodium-Parasenecio (L-C-P) complex of the Tussilagininae (Asteraceae: Senecioneae) contains more than 200 species that are endemic to the Qinghai-Tibetan Plateau in eastern Asia. These species are morphologically distinct; however, their relationships appear complex. A phylogenetic analysis of members of the complex and selected taxa of the tribe Senecioneae was conducted using chloroplast (ndhF and trnL-F) and nuclear (ITS) sequences. Phylogenetic trees were constructed from individual and combined data sets of the three different sequences. All analyses suggested that Doronicum, a genus that has been included in the Tussilagininae, should be excluded from this subtribe and placed at the base of the tribe Senecioneae. In addition, the Tussilagininae should be broadly circumscribed to include the Tephroseridinae. Within the expanded Tussilagininae containing all 13 genera occurring in eastern Asia, Tussilago and Petasites diverged early as a separate lineage, while the remaining 11 genera comprise an expanded L-C-P complex clade. We suggest that the L-C-P clade, which is largely unresolved, most likely originated as a consequence of an explosive radiation. The few monophyletic subclades identified in the L-C-P clade with robust support further suggest that some genera of Tussilagininae from eastern Asia require generic re-circumscriptions given the occurrence of subclades containing species of the same genus in different parts of the phylogentic tree due to homoplasy of important morphological characters used to delimit them. Molecular-clock analyses suggest that the explosive radiation of the L-C-P complex occurred mostly within the last 20 million years, which falls well within the period of recent major uplifts of the Qinghai-Tibetan Plateau between the early Miocene to the Pleistocene. It is proposed that significant increases in geological and ecological diversity that accompanied such uplifting, most likely promoted rapid and continuous allopatric speciation in small and isolated populations, and allowed fixation or acquisition of similar morphological characters within unrelated lineages. This phenomenon, possibly combined with interspecific diploid hybridization because of secondary sympatry during relatively stable stages between different uplifts, could be a major cause of high species diversity in the Qinghai-Tibetan Plateau and adjacent areas of eastern Asia.
S1229	J. L. Peters;K. G. McCracken;Y. N. Zhuravlev;Y. Lu;R. E. Wilson;K. P. Johnson;K. E. Omland	2005	Phylogenetics of wigeons and allies (Anatidae: Anas): the importance of sampling multiple loci and multiple individuals	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution							Species-level DNA phylogenies frequently suffer from two shortcomings ˆ gene trees usually are constructed from a single locus, and often species are represented by only one individual. To evaluate the effect of these two shortcomings, we tested phylogenetic hypotheses within the wigeons and allies, a clade of Anas ducks (Anatidae) composed of five species. We sequenced two nuclear introns from the Z-chromosome-linked chromo-helicase binding protein gene (CHD1Zb and CHD1Za) and the mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) control region for multiple individuals sampled from widespread geographic locations. We compared these phylogenies to previously published phylogenies constructed from morphology and protein coding regions of mtDNA. Relative to other nuclear introns, CHD showed remarkable phylogenetic utility. Of the 26 CHD1Zb alleles identified, only one was shared between two species, and the combined CHD datasets revealed that four of the five species were consistent with monophyly. Several species shared mtDNA haplotypes, which probably was a result of interspecific hybridization. Overall, the nuclear CHD tree and the mtDNA tree were more congruent with coding regions of mtDNA than they were with morphology.
S1418	H. G. Spencer;F. J. Brook;M. Kennedy	2005	Phylogeography of Kauri Snails and their allies from Northland, New Zealand (Mollusca: Gastropoda: Rhytididae: Paryphantinae)	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution							No abstract is available.
S1295	S. J. Steppan;R. M. Adkins;P. Q. Spinks;C. Hale	2005	Multigene phylogeny of the Old World mice, Murinae, reveals distinct geographic lineages and the declining utility of mitochondrial genes compared to nuclear genes	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution							Despite its great diversity and biomedical importance, the rodent subfamily Murinae is poorly resolved phylogenetically. We present the first cladistic analysis sampling multiple representatives of most major groups based on DNA sequence for three nuclear (GHR, RAG1, AP5) and one mitochondrial (COII and parts of COI and ATPase 8) fragments. Analyzed separately, the four partitions agree broadly with each other and the combined analysis. The basal split is between a clade of Philippine Old Endemics and all remaining murines. Within the latter, rapid radiation led to at least seven geographically distinct lineages, including a Southeast Asian Rattus clade; a diverse Australo-Papuan and Philippine clade; an African arvicanthine group including the otomyines; an African Praomys group; and three independent genera from Africa and Asia, Mus, Apodemus, and Malacomys. The murines appear to have originated in Southeast Asia and then rapidly expanded across all of the Old World. Both nuclear exons provide robust support at all levels. In contrast, the bootstrap proportions from mitochondrial data decline rapidly with increasing depth in the tree, together suggesting that nuclear genes may be more useful even for relatively recent divergences (<10 MY).
S1340	T. H. Struck;K. M. Halanych;G. Purschke	2005	Dinophilidae (Annelida) is most likely not a progenetic Eunicida; Evidence from 18S and 28S rDNA	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution							Dinophilidae is a meiofaunal group of annelids with incomplete segmentation and generally reduced development of morphological features. Progenetic origin has been invoked to explain dinophilids as derived Eunicida, because of the resemblance between adult dinophilids and larval eunicidans. Eunicida, a well-defined taxon within Annelida due to a ventral pharyngeal organ with a complex jaw apparatus, includes species up to 6m length. However, many larval and juvenile features are widespread among polychaetes and definitive morphological synapomorphies placing Dinophilidae within Eunicida are lacking. Furthermore, using 18S data, Struck et al. (2002) was not able to clearly support or refute the hypothesis that dinophilid arose as a progenetic eunicidan lineage. Thus, the phylogenetic relationship between Dinophilidae and other Eunicida remains unresolved. In the present study, we used sequences of the 18S and 28S rDNA to test the hypothesized progenetic origin of Dinophilidae. Combined analyses of these two genes were performed using maximum likelihood and Bayesian methods as well as statistical tests of phylogenetic hypotheses (KH and SOWH tests). All analyses suggest Dinophilidae is not a eunicidan lineage, and statistical tests significantly reject the hypothesis of progenetic origin within Eunicida. However, exact placement of Dinophilidae among Annelida still remains unclear.
S1377	O. Torres-Carvajal;J. A. S. Ii;J. E. Cadle	2005	Phylogenetic relationships of South American lizards of the genus Stenocercus (Squamata: Iguania): a new approach using a general mixture model for gene sequence data	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution							The South American iguanian lizard genus Stenocercus includes 54 species occurring mostly in the Andes and adjacent lowland areas from northern Venezuela and Colombia to central Argentina at elevations of 0ˆ4000 m. Small taxon or character sampling has characterized all phylogenetic analyses of Stenocercus, which has long been recognized as sister taxon to the Tropidurus Group. In this study, we use mtDNA sequence data to perform phylogenetic analyses that include 32 species of Stenocercus and 12 outgroup taxa. Monophyly of this genus is strongly supported by maximum parsimony and Bayesian analyses. Evolutionary relationships within Stenocercus are further analyzed with a Bayesian implementation of a general mixture model, which accommodates variability in the pattern of evolution across sites. These analyses indicate a basal split of Stenocercus into two clades, one of which receives very strong statistical support. In addition, we test previous hypotheses using non-parametric and parametric statistical methods, and provide a phylogenetic classification for Stenocercus.
S1310	G. A. Verboom	2005	A phylogeny of the schoenoid sedges (Cyperaceae: Schoeneae) based on plastid DNA sequences, with special reference to the genera found in Africa	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution							Despite its large size (about 700 species) the australy-centred sedge tribe Schoeneae has received little explicit phylogenetic study, especially using molecular data. As a result, generic relationships are poorly understood, and even the monophyly of the tribe is open to question. In this paper, plastid DNA sequences (rbcL, trnL-trnF and rps16) drawn from a broad array of Schoeneae are analysed using Bayesian and parsimony-based approaches in order to infer a framework phylogeny for the tribe. Both analytical methods broadly support the monophyly of Schoeneae, Bayesian methods doing so with good support. Within the schoenoid clade, there is strong support for a series of monophyletic generic groupings whose interrelationships are unclear. These lineages form a large polytomy at the base of Schoeneae that may be indicative of past radiation, probably following the fragmentation of Gondwana. Most of these lineages contain both African and non-African members, suggesting a history of intercontinental dispersal. The results of this study clearly identify the relationships of the African-endemic schoenoid genera and demonstrate that the African-Australasian genus Tetraria, like Costularia, is polyphyletic. This pattern is morphologically consistent, and suggests that these genera require realignment.
S1416	H. Verbruggen;O. D. Clerck;T. Schils;W. H. C. F. Kooistra;E. Coppejans	2005	Evolution and phylogeography of Halimeda section Halimeda	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution	37		789-803				Nuclear ribosomal and plastid DNA sequences of specimens belonging to section Halimeda of the pantropical green seaweed genus Halimeda show that the group under scrutiny contains many more genetically delineable species than those recognized by classical taxonomy. Discordances between phylograms inferred from nuclear and plastid DNA sequences suggest that reticulate evolution has been involved in speciation within the clade. Nonetheless, our data do not allow ruling out certain alternative explanations for the discordances. Several pseudo-cryptic species are restricted to the margins of the generic distribution range. In a clade of H. cuneata sibling species from widely separated subtropical localities in the Indian Ocean, the South African sibling branches off first, leaving the Arabian and West Australian species as closest relatives. We hypothesize that geographic isolation of the siblings may have taken place following Pleistocene or Pliocene periods of climatic cooling during which subtropical species occupied larger distribution ranges. A more basal separation of Atlantic, Indo-Pacific, and Mediterranean species indicates vicariance. The alternative events that could have caused this vicariance are discussed.
S1334	K. Voigt;A. J. Cozijnsen;J. Kroymann;S. Pöggeler;B. J. Howlett	2005	Phylogenetic relationships between members of the crucifer pathogenic Leptosphaeria maculans species complex as shown by mating type (MAT1-2), actin and beta tubulin sequences	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution	37	2	541-557				The dothideomycetous fungus Leptosphaeria maculans comprises a complex of species differing in specificity and pathogenicity on Brassica napus. Twenty eight isolates were investigated and compared to 20 other species of the Pleosporales order. Sequences of the mating type MAT1-2 (23), fragments of actin (48) and beta tubulin (45) genes were determined and used for phylogenetic analyses inferred by maximum parsimony, distance, maximum likelihood and Bayesian approaches. These different approaches using single genes essentially confirmed findings using concatenated sequences. L. maculans formed a monophyletic group separate from L. biglobosa. The L. biglobosa clade encompasses five subˆclades. This is generally consistent with a classification made previously on the basis of internal transcribed sequences of the ribosomal DNA repeat. The propensity for purifying and neutral evolution of the three genes was determined using sliding window analysis, a technique not previously applied to genes of filamentous fungi. For members of the L. maculans species complex, this approach showed that in comparison to actin and beta tubulin, exonic sequences of MAT1-2 were more diverse and appeared to evolve at a faster rate. However, different regions of MAT1-2 displayed different degrees of sequence conservation. The more conserved upstream region (including the High Mobility Group domain) may be better suited for interspecies differentiation, while the more diverse downstream region is more appropriate for intraspecies comparisons.
S1341	H. Wiklund;A. Nygren;F. Pleijel;P. Sundberg	2005	Phylogeny of Aphroditiformia (Polychaeta) based on molecular and morphological data	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution							The phylogeny of Aphroditiformia, benthic polychaetes carrying dorsal elytra, is assessed from nuclear 18S rDNA, mitochondrial cytochrome c oxidase subunit I (COI), and 31 morphological characters. Two non-elytrabearing taxa, Palmyra and Pisione, are included to assess their relationship to the elytrabearers. The data are analysed both separately and combined, with parsimony, maximum likelihood and Bayesian analyses. In total, 19 terminal taxa are examined, including 12 elytrabearing taxa from all scale-worm groups, Palmyra, Pisione and five outgroup taxa. The results show that Palmyra and Pisione are nested within Aphroditiformia. Palmyra is sister to Aphrodita, and both Pisione and Pholoe are positioned within Sigalionidae, suggesting that both family names Pisionidae and Pholoidae should be treated as junior synonyms of Sigalionidae.
S1231	N. G. Wilson;M. S. Y. Lee	2005	Molecular phylogeny of Chromodoris (Mollusca, Nudibranchia) and the identification of a planar spawning clade	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution							High levels of convergent evolution have often made it difficult to infer the evolutionary history of highly-derived opisthobranch molluscs. Here, the phylogeny of the nudibranch genus Chromodoris is reconstructed based on partial 16S rRNA, and reveals three major clades. Two southern temperate taxa (Chromodoris ambiguus and C. alternata) group with Cadlina species, rendering Chromodoris paraphyletic. The remaining two Chromodoris clades appear to be diagnosable on the basis of egg mass structure; one group lays planar spiral egg masses and the other lays upright spiral egg masses. There is strong geographic structure in the tree, suggesting that shared colour patterns in sympatric Chromodoris species might be the result of phylogenetic conservatism rather than mimicry.
S1374	A. Zaldivar-Riveron;M. Mori;D. L. J. Quicke	2005	Systematics of the cyclostome subfamilies of braconid parasitic wasps (Hymenoptera: Ichneumonoidea): a simultaneous molecular and morphological Bayesian approach	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution							Phylogenetic relationships among 95 genera collectively representing 17 of the 18 currently recognized cyclostome braconid wasp subfamilies were investigated based on DNA sequence fragments of the mitochondrial COI and the nuclear 28S rDNA genes, in addition to morphological data. The treatment of sequence length variation of the 28S partition was explored by either excluding ambiguously aligned regions and indel information (28SN) or recoding them (28SA) using the Œfragment-level‚ alignment method with a modified coding approach. Bayesian MCMC analyses were performed for the separate and combined data sets and a maximum parsimony analysis was also carried out for the simultaneous molecular and morphological data sets. There was a significant incongruence between the two genes and between 28S and morphology, but not for morphology and COI. Different analyses with the 28SA data matrix resulted in topologies that were generally similar to the ones from the 28SN matrix; however, the former topologies recovered a higher number of significantly supported clades and had a higher mean Bayesian posterior probability, thus supporting the inclusion of information from ambiguously aligned regions and indel events in phylogenetic analyses where possible. Based on the significantly supported clades obtained from the simultaneous molecular and morphological analyses, we propose that a total of 17 subfamilies should be recognized within the cyclostome group. The subfamilial placements of several problematic cyclostome genera were also established.
S1392	L. B. Zhang;M. P. Simmons;A. Kocyan;S. S. Renner	2005	Phylogeny of the Cucurbitales based on DNA sequences of nine loci from three genomes: implications for morphological and sexual system evolution	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution							The Cucurbitales are a clade of rosids with a worldwide distribution and a striking heterogeneity in species diversity among its seven family members: the Anisophylleaceae (29-40 species), Begoniaceae (1400 spp.), Coriariaceae (15 spp.), Corynocarpaceae (6 spp.), Cucurbitaceae (760 spp.), Datiscaceae (2 spp.), and Tetramelaceae (2 spp.). Most Cucurbitales have unisexual flowers, and species are monoecious, dioecious, andromonoecious or androdioecious. To resolve interfamilial relationships within the order and to polarize morphological character evolution, especially of flower sexual systems, we sequenced nine plastid (atpB, matK, ndhF, rbcL, the trnL-F region, and the rpl20-rps12 spacer), nuclear (18S and 26S rDNA), and mitochondrial (nad1 b/c intron) genes (together ~12,000 bp) of 26 representatives of the seven families plus eight outgroup taxa from six other orders of the Eurosids I. Cucurbitales are strongly supported as monophyletic and are closest to Fagales, albeit with moderate support; both together are sister to Rosales. The deepest split in the Cucurbitales is that between the Anisophylleaceae and the remaining families; next is a clade of Corynocarpaceae and Coriariaceae, followed by Cucurbitaceae, which are sister to a clade of Begoniaceae, Datiscaceae, and Tetramelaceae. Based on this topology, stipulate leaves, inferior ovaries, parietal placentation, and one-seeded fruits are inferred as ancestral in Cucurbitales; exstipulate leaves, superior ovaries, apical placentation, and many-seeded fruits evolved within the order. Bisexual flowers are reconstructed as ancestral, but dioecy appears to have evolved already in the common ancestor of Begoniaceae, Cucurbitaceae, Datiscaceae, and Tetramelaceae, and then to have been lost repeatedly in Begoniaceae and Cucurbitaceae. Both instances of androdioecy (Datisca glomerata and Schizopepon bryoniifolius) evolved from dioecious ancestors, corroborating recent hypotheses about androdioecy often evolving from dioecy. Key words: Begoniaceae; character evolution; Cucurbitaceae; Cucurbitales; androdioecy; long-branch attraction; sexual systems; monoecy.
S1660	D. J. Colgan;W. F. Ponder;E. Beacham;J. M. Macaranas	2006	Molecular phylogenetics of Caenogastropoda (Gastropoda: Mollusca)	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution							Caenogastropoda is the dominant group of marine gastropods in terms of species numbers, diversity of habit and habitat and ecological importance. This paper reports the first comprehensive multi-gene phylogenetic study of the group. Data were collected from up to six genes comprising parts of 18S rRNA, 28S rRNA (five segments), 12S rRNA, cytochrome c oxidase subunit I, histone H3 and elongation factor 1á. The alignment has a combined length of 3995 base positions for 36 taxa, comprising 29 Caenogastropoda representing all of its major lineages and seven outgroups. Maximum parsimony, maximum likelihood and Bayesian analyses were conducted. The results generally support monophyly of Caenogastropoda and Hypsogastropoda (Caenogastropoda excepting Architaenioglossa, Cerithioidea and Campanilioidea). Within Hypsogastropoda, maximum likelihood and Bayesian analyses identified a near basal clade of nine or ten families lacking an anterior inhalant siphon, and Cerithiopsidae s.l. (representing Triphoroidea), where the siphon is probably derived independently from other Hypsogastropoda. The asiphonate family Eatoniellidae was usually included in the clade but was removed in one Bayesian analysis. Of the two other studied families lacking a siphon, the limpet-shaped Calyptraeidae was associated with this group in some analyses, but the tent-shaped Xenophoridae was generally associated with the siphonate Strombidae. The other studied hypsogastropods with an anterior inhalant siphon include nine families, six of which are Neogastropoda, the only traditional caenogastropod group above the superfamily-level with strong morphological support. The hypotheses that Neogastropoda are monophyletic and that the group occupies a derived position within Hypsogastropoda are both contradicted, but weakly, by the molecular analyses. Despite the addition of large amounts of new molecular data, many caenogastropod lineages remain poorly resolved or unresolved in the present analyses, possibly due to a rapid radiation of the Hypsogastropoda following the Permian-Triassic extinction during the early Mesozoic.
S1862	S. C. Crews;M. C. Hedin	2006	Studies of morphological and molecular phylogenetic divergence inspiders (Araneae: Homalonychus) from the American southwest including divergence along the Baja Peninsula	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution	38		470-487				Comparative phylogenetic and phylogeographic analyses have revealed a pervasive midpeninsular divergence in the mitochondrial genealogies of numerous vertebrate taxa distributed on the Baja California Peninsula. In this study, we extend the investigation of regional vicariance in Baja California to an arthropod taxon by examining patterns of phylogenetic and morphological divergence in the spider genus Homalonychus (Araneae, Homalonychidae). We analyzed data from two mtDNA genes (16S rRNA and NADH dehydrogenase subunit (1) and a nuclear gene (28S rRNA) using maximum parsimony and Bayesian phylogenetic analyses, and also conducted geometric morphometric analyses employing landmark data on male and female genitalia. Genes and morphology both reveal a deep split across the Colorado River and Gulf of California, separating Homalonychus selenopoides on the east side of river from its congener Homalonychus theologus on the west side of the river, including the Baja California Peninsula. Along the northˆsouth axis of the Baja Peninsula, an apparently more recent midpeninsular phylogenetic break is evident within H. theologus in the mitochondrial genome and in female genitalia. However, there is no measurable divergence between northern and southern populations in either nuclear DNA or male genitalia. We suggest that this discordance between datasets reflects either a difference in rates of evolution between male versus female systems, or that male-based nuclear gene flow is obscuring a phylogenetic split that is fixed in the female-based systems. Our findings provide additional support for a midpeninsular Baja divergence event, although the timing and geological evidence for such an event remain elusive.
S1520	M. Dohrmann;O. Voigt;D. Erpenbeck;G. Woerheide	2006	Non-monophyly of most supraspecific taxa of calcareous sponges (Porifera, Calcarea) revealed by increased taxon sampling and partitioned Bayesian analysis of ribosomal DNA	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution							Calcareous sponges (Porifera, Calcarea) play an important role for our understanding of early metazoan evolution, since several molecular studies suggested their closer relationship to Eumetazoa than to the other major sponge taxa Demospongiae and Hexactinellida. The division of Calcarea into the subtaxa Calcinea and Calcaronea is well established by now, but their internal relationships remain largely unresolved. Here, we estimate phylogenetic relationships within Calcarea in a Bayesian framework, using full-length 18S and partial 28S ribosomal DNA sequences. Both genes are analyzed separately and in combination, and are further partitioned by stem and loop regions, the former being modelled to take non-independence of paired sites into account. By substantially increasing taxon sampling, we show that most of the traditionally recognized supraspecific taxa within Calcinea and Calcaronea are not monophyletic, challenging the existing classification system, while monophyly of Calcinea and Calcaronea is again highly supported.
S1387	N. W. Ellison;A. Liston;J. J. Steiner;W. M. Williams;N. L. Taylor	2006	Molecular phylogenetics of the clover genus (Trifolium--Leguminosae)	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution	39	3	688-705				Trifolium, the clover genus, is one of the largest genera of the legume family. We conducted parsimony and Bayesian phylogenetic analyses based on nuclear ribosomal DNA internal transcribed spacer and chloroplast trnL intron sequences obtained from 218 of the ca. 250 species of Trifolium, representatives from 11 genera of the vicioid clade, and an outgroup Lotus. We confirm the monophyly of Trifolium, and propose a new subgeneric classification of the genus based on the phylogenetic results. Incongruence between the nrDNA and cpDNA results suggest 5-6 cases of apparent hybrid speciation, and identifies the putative progenitors of the allopolyploids T. dubium, a widespread weed, and T. repens, the most commonly cultivated clover species. Character state reconstructions confirm that 2n=16 is the ancestral chromosome number in Trifolium, and infer a minimum of 19 instances of aneuploidy and 18 of polyploidy in the genus. The annual lifespan is hypothesized to be ancestral in Trifolium, while transitions to the perennial habit and reversals to the annual habit are common. Our results are consistent with a Mediterranean origin of the genus, probably in the Early Miocene. A single origin of all North and South American species is hypothesized, while the species of sub-Saharan Africa may originate from three separate dispersal events.
S1663	D. W. Foltz;M. T. Bolton;S. P. Kelley;B. D. Kelley;A. T. Nguyen	2006	Combined mitochondrial and nuclear sequences support the monophyly of forcipulatacean sea stars	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution							Previous molecular phylogenetic analyses of forcipulatacean sea stars (Echinodermata: Asteroidea) have reconstructed a non-monophyletic order Forcipulatida, provided that two or more forcipulate families are included. This result could mean that one or more assumptions of the reconstruction method was violated, or else the traditional classification could be erroneous. The present molecular phylogenetic analysis included 12 non-forcipulatacean and 39 forcipulatacean sea stars, with multiple representatives of all but one of the forcipulate families and/or subfamilies. Bayesian analysis of approximately 4.2 Kb of sequence data representing seven partitions (nuclear 18S rRNA and 28S rRNA, mitochondrial 12S rRNA, 16S rRNA, 5 tRNAs and cytochrome oxidase I with first and second codon positions analyzed separately from third codon positions) recovered a consensus tree with three well-supported clades (78-100% bootstrap support) that corresponded at least approximately to traditional taxonomic ranks: the superorder Forcipulatacea (Forcipulatida + Brisingida) + Pteraster, the Brisingida/Brisingidae and Asteriidae + Rathbunaster + Pycnopodia. When a molecular clock was enforced, the partitioned Bayesian analysis recovered the traditional Forcipulatacea. Five of six genera represented by two or more species were monophyletic with 100% bootstrap support. Most of the traditional subfamilial and familial groupings within the Forcipulatida were either unresolved or non-monophyletic. The separate partitions differed considerably in estimates of model parameters, mainly between nuclear sequences (with high GC content, low rates of sequence substitution and high transition/transversion rate ratios) and mitochondrial sequences.
S1532	T. L. Fulton;C. Strobeck	2006	Molecular phylogeny of the Arctoidea (Caniformia: Carnivora): Effect of missing data on supertree and supermatrix analyses of multiple gene data sets	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution	41	1	165-181				Phylogenetic relationships of 79 caniform carnivores were addressed based on four nuclear sequence-tagged sites (STS) and one nuclear exon, IRBP, using both supertree and supermatrix analyses. We recovered the three major arctoid lineages, Ursidae, Pinnipedia, and Musteloidea, as monophyletic, with Ursidae (bears) strongly supported as the basal arctoid lineage. Within Pinnipedia, Phocidae (true seals) were sister to the Otaroidea [Otariidae (fur seals and sea lions) and Odobenidae (walrus)]. Phocid subfamily and tribal designations were supported, but the otariid subfamily split between fur seals and sea lions was not. All family designations within Musteloidea were strongly supported: Mephitidae (skunks), Ailuridae (monotypic red panda), Mustelidae (weasels, badgers, otters), and Procyonidae (raccoons). A novel hypothesis for the position of the red panda was recovered, placing it as branching after Mephitidae and before Mustelidae + Procyonidae. Within Mustelidae, subfamily taxonomic changes are considered. This study represents the most comprehensive sampling to date of the Caniformia in a molecular study and contains the most complete molecular phylogeny for the Procyonidae. Our data set was also used in an empirical examination of the effect of missing data on both supertree and supermatrix analyses. Sequence for all genes in all taxa could not be obtained, so two variants of the data set with differing amounts of missing data were examined. The amount of missing data did not have a strong effect; instead, phylogenetic resolution was more dependent on the presence of sufficient informative characters. Supertree and supermatrix methods performed equivalently with incomplete data and were highly congruent; conflicts arose only in weakly supported areas, indicating that more informative characters are required to confidently resolve close species relationships.
S1670	H. Klompen;M. Lekveishvili;W. C. B. Iv	2006	Phylogeny of parasitiform mites (Acari) based on rRNA	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution							Acari (mites and ticks) form one the most diverse lineages of arthropods, but basal relationships in the group are still poorly understood. The current study addresses this issue for one of its two main lineages, the order Parasitiformes. Relationships are examined at the subordinal and infraordinal level using complete 18S and partial 28S nuclear rRNA sequence data. Most currently recognized lineages are recovered with good support, suggesting that nuclear rRNA, and specifically 18S rRNA, is very well suited for analyzing relationships at this level in this lineage. These results were found despite quite variable rates of sequence evolution, with rates „ratcheting up‰ from relatively low in most non-mite arachnid lineages, to intermediate in Pseudoscorpiones, the mite order Acariformes, and the parasitiform suborders Opilioacarida, Holothyrida, and Ixodida, to high in the parasitiform suborder Mesostigmata. The very species rich and highly diverse mesostigmatid infraorder Dermanyssina, while showing huge distances to outgroups, shows remarkably low within-group divergence in nuclear rRNA, suggesting the possibility of a relatively recent origin of this lineage.
S1671	H. Klompen;M. Lekveishvili;W. C. B. Iv	2006	Phylogeny of parasitiform mites (Acari) based on rRNA	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution							Acari (mites and ticks) form one the most diverse lineages of arthropods, but basal relationships in the group are still poorly understood. The current study addresses this issue for one of its two main lineages, the order Parasitiformes. Relationships are examined at the subordinal and infraordinal level using complete 18S and partial 28S nuclear rRNA sequence data. Most currently recognized lineages are recovered with good support, suggesting that nuclear rRNA, and specifically 18S rRNA, is very well suited for analyzing relationships at this level in this lineage. These results were found despite quite variable rates of sequence evolution, with rates „ratcheting up‰ from relatively low in most non-mite arachnid lineages, to intermediate in Pseudoscorpiones, the mite order Acariformes, and the parasitiform suborders Opilioacarida, Holothyrida, and Ixodida, to high in the parasitiform suborder Mesostigmata. The very species rich and highly diverse mesostigmatid infraorder Dermanyssina, while showing huge distances to outgroups, shows remarkably low within-group divergence in nuclear rRNA, suggesting the possibility of a relatively recent origin of this lineage.
S1432	P. Korall;K. M. Pryer;J. Metzgar;H. Schneider;D. S. Conant	2006	Tree ferns: monophyletic groups and their relationships as revealed by four protein-coding plastid loci	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution							Tree ferns are a well-established clade within leptosporangiate ferns. Most of the 600 species (in seven families and 13 genera) are arborescent, but considerable morphological variability exists, spanning the giant scaly tree ferns (Cyatheaceae), the low, erect plants (Plagiogyriaceae), and the diminutive creeping endemics of the Guyana Highlands in Venezuela (Hymenophyllopsidaceae). In this study we investigate phylogenetic relationships within tree ferns based on analyses of four protein-coding, plastid loci (atpA, atpB, rbcL, and rps4). Our results reveal four well-supported clades, with genera of Dicksoniaceae (sensu Kubitzki, 1990) interspersed among them: A) (Loxomataceae, (Culcita, Plagiogyriaceae)), B) (Calochlaena, (Dicksonia, Lophosoriaceae)), C) Cibotium, and D) Cyatheaceae, with Hymenophyllopsidaceae nested within. How these four groups are related to one other, to Thyrsopteris, or to Metaxyaceae is weakly supported. Our results show that Dicksoniaceae and Cyatheaceae, as currently recognised, are not monophyletic and new circumscriptions for these families are needed.
S1451	A. D. Leache;J. A. McGuire	2006	Phylogenetic Relationships of Horned Lizards (Phrynosoma) Based on Nuclear and Mitochondrial Data: Evidence for a Misleading Mitochondrial Gene Tree	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution	39		628-644				It has proven remarkably difficult to obtain a well-resolved and strongly supported phylogeny for horned lizards (Phrynosoma) because of incongruence between morphological and mitochondrial DNA sequence data. We infer the phylogenetic relationships among all 17 extant Phrynosoma species using >5.1 kb of mtDNA (12S rRNA, 16s rRNA, ND1, ND2, ND4, Cyt b, and associated tRNA genes), and >2,2 kb from three nuclear genes (RAG-1, BDNF, and GAPD) for most taxa. We conduct separate and combined phylogenetic analyses of these data using maximum parsimony, maximum likelihood, and Bayesian methods. The phylogenetic relationships inferred from the mtDNA data are congruent with previous mtDNA analyses based on fewer characters and provide strong support for most branches. However, we detected strong incongruence between the mtDNA and nuclear data using comparisons of branch support and Shimodaira-Hasegawa tests, with the (P. platyrhinos + P. goodei) clade identified as the primary source of this conflict. Our analysis of a P. mcallii x P. goodei hybrid suggests that this incongruence is caused by reticulation via introgressive hybridization. Our preferred phylogeny based on an analysis of the combined data (excluding the introgressed mtDNA data) provides a new framework for interpreting character evolution and biogeography within Phrynosoma. In the context of this improved phylogeny we propose a phylogenetic taxonomy highlighting four clades: 1) TAPAJA, containing the viviparous short-horned lizards P. ditmarsi, P. hernandesi, P. douglasii, and P. orbiculare; 2) ANOTA, containing species with prominent cranial horns (P. solare, P. mcallii, and the P. coronatum group); 3) DOLIOSAURUS, containing three species lacking antipredator blood-squirting (P. modestum, P. platyrhinos, and P. goodei); and 4) BREVICAUDA, containing two viviparous species with extremely short tails that lack blood-squirting (P. braconnieri and P. taurus).
S1436	A. H. B. Loo;J. Dransfield;M. W. Chase;W. J. Baker	2006	Low copy nuclear DNA, phylogeny and the evolution of dichogamy in the betel nut palms and their relatives (Arecinae; Arecaceae)	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution							For the betel nut palm genus Areca and the other seven genera in subtribe Arecinae (Areceae; Arecoideae; Arecaceae) we collected DNA sequences from two low-copy nuclear genes, phosphoribulokinase (PRK) and the second largest subunit of RNA polymerase II (RPB2). The data were used to evaluate monophyly of the subtribe and its component genera, explore the radiation of the group across its range, and examine evolution of protandry and protogyny, which is particularly diverse in Arecinae. The subtribe and some genera are not monophyletic. Three lineages of Arecinae are recovered: one widespread, but centered on the Sunda Shelf, another endemic to the islands east of Wallace‚s Line and a third, comprising the Sri Lanka endemic Loxococcus, that is most closely related to genera from outside subtribe Arecinae. In clarifying phylogenetic relationships, we have demonstrated that a perceived bimodal distribution of the subtribe across Wallace‚s Line does not in fact exist. Character optimizations indicate that the evolution of protogyny, an unusual condition in palms, is potentially correlated with a large radiation in the genus Pinanga and possibly also to dramatic diversification in pollen morphology and genome size. The evolution of dichogamy in the clade endemic to the east of Wallace‚s line is complex and reveals a pattern of numerous transformations between protandry and protogyny that is in marked contrast with other Arecinae. We suggest that this contrast is most likely a reflection of differing geological histories and pollinator spectra in each region.
S1525	P. E. Marek;J. E. Bond	2006	Phylogenetic systematics of the colorful, cyanide-producing millipedes of Appalachia (Polydesmida, Xystodesmidae, Apheloriini) using a total evidence Bayesian approach	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution							Here we provide an exemplar-approach phylogeny of the xystodesmid millipede tribe Apheloriini with a focus on genus-group relationships˜particularly of the genus <i>Brachoria</i>. Exemplars for the phylogenetic analysis were chosen to represent the maximum breadth of morphological diversity within all nominal genera in the tribe Apheloriini, and to broadly sample the genus <i>Brachoria</i>. In addition, three closely related tribes were used (Rhysodesmini, Nannariini, and Pachydesmini). Morphological and DNA sequence data were scored for Bayesian inference of phylogeny. Phylogenetic analysis resulted in polyphyletic genera <i>Brachoria</i> and <i>Sigmoria</i>, a monophyletic Apheloriini, and a „southern clade‰ that contains most of the tribal species diversity. We used this phylogeny to track morphological character histories and reconstruct ancestral states using stochastic character mapping. Based on the findings from character mapping, the diagnostic feature of the genus <i>Brachoria</i>, the cingulum, evolved independently in two lineages. We compared our phylogeny against prior classifications using Bayes factor hypothesis-testing and found that our phylogenetic hypothesis is inconsistent with the previous hypotheses underlying the most recent classification. With our preferred total evidence phylogeny as a framework for taxonomic modifications, we describe a new genus, <i>Appalachioria</i>; supply phylogenetic diagnoses of monophyletic taxa; and provide a phylogeny-based classification for the tribe Apheloriini.
S1649	H. Meimberg;T. Abele;C. Bräuchler;J. K. McKay;P. L. Pérez de Paz;G. Heubl	2006	Molecular evidence for adaptive radiation of Micromeria Benth. (Lamiaceae) on the Canary Islands as inferred from chloroplast and nuclear DNA sequences and ISSR fingerprint data	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution				10.1016/j.ympev.2006.05.037			In the last decade the Canary Islands have been a focus for phylogeographic studies on the colonization and diversification of endemic Angiosperm taxa. Based on phylogeographic patterns, inter island colonization and adaptive radiation seem to be a driving force for speciation in most taxa. The genus Micromeria (Lamiaceae, Mentheae) includes 16 species and 13 subspecies in Macaronesia. Most taxa are restricted endemics, or grow in similar ecological conditions on two islands. An exception is M. varia, a widespread species inhabits the lowland scrub on each island of the archipelago and could represent an ancestral taxon from which radiation started on the different islands. Here we investigated the diversification of Micromeria on the Canary Islands and Madeira at the inter- and infraspecific level using Inter Simple Sequence Repeat PCR (ISSR), the trnK-Intron and the trnT-trnL-spacer of the cpDNA and a low copy nuclear gene. All datasets support a split between the "eastern" islands Fuerteventura, Lanzarote and Gran Canaria and the "western" islands Tenerife, La Palma and El Hierro. The colonization of Madeira started from the western Islands, probably from Tenerife as indicated by the sequence data. We identified two lineages of Micromeria on Gomera but all other islands appear to be colonized by a single lineage, supporting adaptive radiation as the major evolutionary force for the diversification of Micromeria. We discuss as alternative that introgressions led to a homogenization of the genotypes of different Micromeria species on one island after multiple colonizations.
S1426	M. J. Moore;R. K. Jansen	2006	Molecular evidence for the age, origin, and evolutionary history of the American desert plant genus Tiquilia (Boraginaceae)	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution							Although the deserts of North America are of very recent origin, their characteristic arid-adapted endemic plant lineages have been suggested to be much older. Earlier researchers have hypothesized that the ancestors of many of these modern desert lineages first adapted to aridity in highly localized arid or semi-arid sites as early as the late Cretaceous or early Tertiary, and that these lineages subsequently spread and diversified as global climate became increasingly arid during the Cenozoic. No study has explicitly examined these hypotheses for any North American arid-adapted plant group. The current paper tests these hypotheses using the genus Tiquilia (Boraginaceae), a diverse North American desert plant group. A strongly supported phylogeny of the genus is estimated using combined sequence data from three chloroplast markers (matK, ndhF, and rps16) and two nuclear markers (ITS and waxy). Ages of divergence events within the genus are estimated using penalized likelihood and a molecular clock approach on the ndhF tree for Tiquilia and representative outgroups, including most of the major lineages of Boraginales. The dating analysis suggests that the stem lineage of Tiquilia split from its nearest extant relative in the Paleocene or Eocene (~59-48 Ma). This was followed by a relatively long period before the first divergence in the crown group near the Eocene/Oligocene boundary (~33-29 Ma), shortly after the greatest Cenozoic episode of rapid aridification. Divergence of seven major lineages of Tiquilia is dated to the early-to-mid Miocene (~23-13 Ma). Several major lineages show a marked increase in diversification concomitant with the onset of more widespread semi-arid and then arid conditions beginning in the late Miocene (~7 Ma). This sequence of divergence events in Tiquilia agrees well with earlier researchersÕ ideas concerning North American desert flora assembly.
S1552	V. Nazari;E. V. Zakharov;F. A. H. Sperling	2006	Phylogeny, historical biogeography, and taxonomic ranking of Parnassiinae (Lepidoptera, Papilionidae) based on morphology and seven genes	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution							We tested the taxonomic utility of morphology and seven mitochondrial or nuclear genes in a phylogenetic reconstruction of swallowtail butterflies in the subfamily Parnassiinae. Our data included 236 morphological characters and DNA sequences for seven genes that are commonly used to infer lepidopteran relationships (COI+COII, ND5, ND1, 16S, EF-1a, and wg; total 5775 bp). Nuclear genes performed best for inferring phylogenies, particularly at higher taxonomic levels, while there was substantial variation in performance among mitochondrial genes. Multiple analyses of molecular data (MP, ML and Bayesian) consistently produced a tree topology different from that obtained by morphology alone. Based on molecular evidence, sister-group relationships were confirmed between the genera Hypermnestra and Parnassius, as well as between Archon and Luehdorfia, while the monophyly of the subfamily was weakly supported. We recognize three tribes within Parnassiinae, with Archon and Luehdorfia forming the tribe Luehdorfiini Tutt, 1896 [stat. rev.]. Three fossil taxa were incorporated into a molecular clock analysis with biogeographic time constraints. Based on dispersal-vicariance (DIVA) analysis, the most recent common ancestor of Parnassiinae occurred in the Iranian Plateau and Central Asia to China. Early diversification of Parnassiinae took place at the same time that India collided into Eurasia, 65-42 million years ago.
S1466	M. Ohkuma;K. Saita;T. Inoue;T. Kudo	2006	Comparison of four protein phylogeny and detailed analysis based on glycelaldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase sequences of parabasalian symbionts in termite guts	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution							Inferences of parabasalian phylogeny based on the small subunit (SSU) rRNA gene often hamper due to the high-level of sequence divergence. New protein sequences from five parabasalian symbionts of termites (devescovinid, calonymphid and three hypermastigids) were added to data sets of glycelaldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH), enolase, a- and b-tubulins, and inferred phylogenetic relationships. GAPDH gave significant resolutions and showed overall congruence with the well-defined relationships found in the SSU rRNA-based phylogeny. The stability of the GAPDH tree increased after removing fast-evolving amino acid positions. Although several groups of taxa were commonly found, the other three proteins were poorly resolved particularly in branching orders of the groups. In the combined protein data and detailed GAPDH analyses, two hypermastigid lineages, Trichonymphida and Spirotrichonymphida branched from outside of trichomonads, and Trichonymphida most likely located at the basal position of parabasalids, both of which placements have been doubted in the SSU rRNA analyses. The GAPDH data overcame the problem of resolution and provided us a reliable framework of parabasalian phylogeny.
S1650	N. Pedersen;D. T. Holyoak;A. E. Newton	2006	Systematics and morphological evolution within the moss family Bryaceae: a comparison between parsimony and Bayesian methods for reconstruction of ancestral character states	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution							The Bryaceae are a large cosmopolitan moss family including genera of significant morphological and taxonomic complexity. Phylogenetic relationships within the Bryaceae were reconstructed based on DNA sequence data from all three genomic compartments. In addition, maximum parsimony and Bayesian inference were employed to reconstruct ancestral characters states of 38 morphological plus four habitat characters and eight insertion/deletion events. The recovered phylogenetic patterns are generally in accord with previous phylogenies based on chloroplast DNA sequence data and three major clades are identified. The first clade comprises Bryum bornholmense, B. rubens, B. caespiticium, and Plagiobryum. This corroborates the hypothesis suggested by previous studies that several Bryum species are more closely related to Plagiobryum than to the core Bryum species. The second clade includes Acidodontium, Anomobryum, and Haplodontium, while the third clade contains the core Bryum species plus Imbribryum. Within the latter clade, B. subapiculatum and B. tenuisetum form the sister clade to Imbribryum. Reconstructions of ancestral character states under maximum parsimony and Bayesian inference suggest fourteen morphological synapomorphies for the ingroup and synapomorphies are detected for most clades within the ingroup. Maximum parsimony and Bayesian reconstructions of ancestral character states are mostly congruent although Bayesian inference shows that the posterior probability of ancestral character states may decrease dramatically when node support is taken into account. Bayesian inference also indicates that reconstructions may be ambiguous at internal nodes for highly polymorphic characters.
S1622	J. P. Placyk Jr;G. M. Burghardt;R. L. Small;R. B. King;G. S. Casper;J. W. Robinson	2006	Post-glacial recolonization of the Great Lakes region by the common gartersnake (Thamnophis sirtalis) inferred from mtDNA sequences	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution							Pleistocene events played an important role in the differentiation of North American vertebrate populations. Michigan, in particular, and the Great Lakes region, in general, were greatly influenced by the last glaciation. While several hypotheses regarding the recolonization of this region have been advanced, none have been strongly supported. We generated 148 complete ND2 mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) sequences from common gartersnake (Thamnophis sirtalis) populations throughout the Great Lakes region to evaluate phylogeographic patterns and population structure and to determine whether the distribution of haplotypic variants is related to the post-Pleistocene retreat of the Wisconsinan glacier. The common gartersnake was utilized, as it is believed to have been one of the primary vertebrate invaders of the Great Lakes region following the most recent period of glacial retreat and because it has been a model species for a variety of evolutionary, ecological, behavioral, and physiological studies. Several genetically distinct evolutionary lineages were supported by both genealogical and molecular population genetic analyses, although to different degrees. The geographic distribution of the majority of these lineages is interpreted as reflecting post-glacial recolonization dynamics during the late Pleistocene. These findings generally support previous hypotheses of range expansion in this region.
S1669	N. Rønsted;G. Salvo;V. Savolainen	2006	Biogeographical and phylogenetic origins of African fig species (Ficus section Galoglychia)	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution							Ficus section Galoglychia (subgenus Urostigma; Moraceae) includes 72 species restricted to the African floristic region (a few extending to the Arabian Peninsula and Socotra). We present the first molecular phylogenetic analysis of the section including 56 ingroup (representing 44 species) and three outgroup taxa, to investigate its monophyly, classification and evolution. We used sequence data from the nuclear ribosomal internal and external transcribed spacers (ITS and ETS). Our results suggest that section Galoglychia is paraphyletic to the neotropical section Americana, although this is not supported by bootstrap analysis and only weakly supported by Bayesian posterior probabilities. Maximum parsimony analysis conflict with maximum likelihood and Bayesian analyses with respect to the closest relatives of section Americana in Africa. The subsections of section Galoglychia proposed by Berg (Proc. Kon. Ned. Akad. Wetensch., Ser. C, 89, 121-127, 1986) are generally supported. We find two major clades of section Galoglychia within Africa possibly corresponding to two main centres of diversity. One clade comprises members of subsections Platyphyllae and Chlamydodorae, which are more concentrated in Eastern Africa, and extend to Madagascar and neighbouring archipelagos (Comores, Mascarenes, Aldabra Islands and Seychelles). The other main clade includes members of subsections Caulocarpae, Cyathistipulae, Crassicostae and Galoglychia, which are concentrated in West and Central Africa.
S1672	S. J. Scheffer;I. S. Winkler;B. M. Wiegmann	2006	Phylogenetic relationships within the leafmining flies (Diptera: Agromyzidae) inferred from sequence data from multiple genes	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution							The leafmining flies (Diptera: Agromyzidae) are a diverse group whose larvae feed internally in leaves, stems, flowers, seeds, and roots of a wide variety of plant hosts. The systematics of agromyzids has remained poorly known due to their small size and morphological homogeneity. We investigated the phylogenetic relationships among genera within the Agromyzidae using parsimony and Bayesian analyses of 2965 bp of DNA sequence data from the mitochondrial COI gene, the nuclear ribosomal 28S gene, and the single copy nuclear CAD gene. We included 86 species in 21 genera, including all but a few small genera, and spanning the diversity within the family. The results from parsimony and Bayesian analyses were largely similar, with major groupings of genera in common. Specifically, both analyses recovered a monophyletic Phytomyzinae and a monophyletic Agromyzinae. Within the subfamilies, genera found to be monophyletic given our sampling include Agromyza, Amauromyza, Calycomyza, Cerodontha, Liriomyza, Melanagromyza, Metopomyza, Nemorimyza, Phytobia, and Pseudonapomyza. Several genera were found to be polyphyletic or paraphyletic including Aulagromyza, Chromatomyia, Phytoliriomyza, Phytomyza, and Ophiomyia. We evaluate our findings and discuss host-use evolution in light of current agromyzid taxonomy and two recent hypotheses of relationships based on morphological data.
S1433	J. E. E. Smedmark;U. Swenson;A. A. Anderberg	2006	Accounting for variation of substitution rates through time in Bayesian phylogeny reconstruction of Sapotoideae (Sapotaceae)	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution							We used Bayesian phylogenetic analysis of 5 kb of chloroplast DNA data from 68 Sapotaceae species to clarify phylogenetic relationships within Sapotoideae, one of the two major clades within Sapotaceae. Variation in substitution rates through time was shown to be a very important aspect of molecular evolution for this data set. Relative rates tests indicated that changes in overall rate have taken place in several lineages during the history of the group and Bayes factors strongly supported a covarion model, which allows the rate of a site to vary over time, over commonly used models that only allow rates to vary across sites. Rate variation over time was actually found to be a more important model component than rate variation across sites. The covarion model was originally developed for coding gene sequences and has so far only been tested for this type of data. The fact that it performed so well with the present data set, consisting mainly of data from noncoding spacer regions, suggests that it deserves a wider consideration in model based phylogenetic inference. Repeatability of phylogenetic results was very difficult to obtain with the more parameter rich models, and analyses with identical settings often supported different topologies. Overparameterization may be the reason why the MCMC did not sample from the posterior distribution in these cases. The problem could, however, be overcome by using less parameter rich evolutionary models, and adjusting the MCMC settings. The phylogenetic results showed that two taxa, previously thought to belong in Sapotoideae, are not part of this group. Eberhardtia aurata is the sister of the two major Sapotaceae clades, Chrysophylloideae and Sapotoideae, and Neohemsleya usambarensis belongs in Chrysophylloideae. Within Sapotoideae two clades, Sideroxyleae and Sapoteae, were strongly supported. Bayesian analysis of the character history of some floral morphological traits showed that the ancestral type of flower in Sapotoideae may have been characterized by floral parts (sepals, petals, stamens, and staminodes) in single whorls of five, entire corolla lobes, and seeds with an adaxial hilum.
S1608	S. Wanke;M. A. Jaramillo;T. Borsch;M. S. Samain;D. Quandt;C. Neinhuis	2006	Evolution of Piperales ÀÜ matK gene and trnK intron sequence data reveal lineage specific resolution contrast	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution				10.1016/j.ympev.2006.07.007			Piperales represent the largest basal angiosperm order with a nearly worldwide distribution. The order includes three species rich genera, Piper (ca. 2000 species), Peperomia (ca. 1500ˆ1700 species), and Aristolochia s. l. (ca. 500 species). Sequences of the matK gene and the non-coding trnK group II intron are analysed for a dense set of 105 taxa representing all families (except Hydnoraceae) and all generic segregates (except Euglypha within Aristolochiaceae) of Piperales. A large number of highly informative indels are found in the Piperales trnK/matK dataset. Within a narrow region approximately 500 nt downstream in the matK coding region (CDS), a length variable simple sequence repeat (SSR) expansion segment occurs, in which insertions and deletions have led to short frame-shifts. These are corrected shortly afterwards, resulting in a maximum of six amino acids being affected. Furthermore, additional non-functional matK copies were found in Zippelia begoniifolia, which can easily be discriminated from the functional open reading frame (ORF). The trnK/matK sequence data fully resolve relationships within Peperomia, whereas they are not effective within Piper. The resolution contrast is correlated with the rate heterogeneity between those lineages. Parsimony, Bayesian and likelihood analyses result in virtually the same topology, and converge on the monophyly of Piperaceae and Saururaceae. Lactoris gains high support as sister to Aristolochiaceae subf. Aristolochioideae, but the different tree inference methods yield conflicting results with respect to the relationships of subfam. Asaroideae. In Piperaceae, a clade formed by the monotypic genus Zippelia and the small genus Manekia (=Sarcorhachis) is sister to the two large genera Piper and Peperomia.
S1420	L. Wanntorp;A. Kocyan;S. S. Renner	2006	Wax Plants Disentangled: A Phylogeny of Hoya (Asclepioideae, Apocynaceae) Inferred from Nuclear and Chloroplast Sequences	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution							Hoya (Marsdenieae, Apocynaceae) includes at least 200 species distributed from India to the Pacific Islands. We here infer major species groups in the genus based on combined sequences from the chloroplast atpB-rbcL spacer, the trnL region, and nuclear ribosomal DNA ITS region for 42 taxa of Hoya and close relatives. To assess levels of ITS polymorphism, ITS sequences for a third of the accessions were obtained by cloning. Most ITS clones grouped by species, indicating that speciation in Hoya usually predates ITS duplication. One ITS sequence of H. carnosa, however, grouped with a sequence of the morphologically similar H. pubicalyx, pointing to recent hybridization or the persistence of paralogous copies through a speciation event. The topology resulting from the combined chloroplast and nuclear data recovers some of the morphology-based sections, such as Acanthostemma and Eriostemma, as well as a well-supported Australian/New Guinean clade.
S1513	D. W. Weisrock;T. J. Papenfuss;J. R. Macey;S. N. Litvinchuk;R. Polymeni;I. H. Ugurtas;E. Zhao;A. Larson	2006	A Molecular Assessment of Phylogenetic Relationships and Lineage Accumulation Rates Within the Family Salamandridae (Amphibia, Caudata)	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution							We examine phylogenetic relationships among salamanders of the family Salamandridae using approximately 2700 bases of new mtDNA sequence data (the tRNALeu, ND1, tRNAIle, tRNAGln, tRNAMet, ND2, tRNATrp, tRNAAla, tRNAAsn, tRNACys, tRNATyr, and COI genes and the origin for light strand replication) collected from 96 individuals representing 60 of the 65 recognized salamandrid species and outgroups. Phylogenetic analyses using maximum parsimony and Bayesian analysis are performed on the new data alone and combined with previously reported sequences from other parts of the mitochondrial genome. The basal phylogenetic split is a polytomy of lineages ancestral to (1) the Italian newt Salamandrina terdigitata, (2) a strongly supported clade comprising the „true‰ salamanders (genera Chioglossa, Mertensiella, Lyciasalamandra and Salamandra), and (3) a strongly supported clade comprising all newts except S. terdigitata. Strongly supported clades within the true salamanders include monophyly of each genus and grouping Chioglossa and Mertensiella as the sister taxon to a clade comprising Lyciasalamandra and Salamandra. Among newts, genera Echinotriton, Pleurodeles and Tylototriton form a strongly supported clade whose sister taxon comprises the genera Calotriton, Cynops, Euproctus, Neurergus, Nothphthalmus, Pachytriton, Paramesotriton, Taricha, and Triturus. Our results strongly support monophyly of all polytypic newt genera except Paramesotriton and Triturus, which appear paraphyletic, and Calotriton, for which only one of two species is sampled. Other well supported clades within newts include (1) Asian genera Cynops, Pachytriton and Paramesotriton, (2) North American genera Notophthalmus and Taricha, (3) the Triturus vulgaris species group and (4) the Triturus cristatus species group; some additional groupings appear strong in Bayesian but not parsimony analyses. Rates of lineage accumulation through time are evaluated using this nearly comprehensive sampling of salamandrid species-level lineages. Rate of lineage accumulation appears constant throughout salamandrid evolutionary history with no obvious fluctuations associated with origins of morphological or ecological novelties.
S1756	S. T. Ahyong;J. Lai;D. Sharkey;D. J. Colgan;P. K. L. Ng	2007	Phylogenetics of the brachyuran crabs (Crustacea: Decapoda): the status of Podotremata based on small subunit nuclear ribosomal RNA	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution	45	2	576-586	10.1016/j.ympev.2007.03.022			The true crabs, the Brachyura, are generally divided into two major groups, the Eubrachyura or Œadvanced‚ crabs, and the Podotremata or ŒprimitiveŒ crabs. The status of Podotremata is one of the most controversial issues in brachyuran systematics. The podotreme crabs, best recognized by their possession of gonopores on the coxae of the pereopods, have variously been regarded as mono-, para- or polyphyletic, or even as non-brachyuran. For the first time, the phylogenetic positions of the podotreme crabs were studied by cladistic analysis of small subunit nuclear ribosomal RNA sequences. Eight of 10 podotreme families were represented along with representatives of 17 eubrachyuran families. Under both maximum parsimony and Bayesian Inference, Podotremata was found to be significantly paraphyletic, comprising three major clades: Dromiacea, Raninoida, and Cyclodorippoida. The most Œbasal‚ is Dromiacea, followed by Raninoida and Cylodorippoida. Notably, Cyclodorippoida was identified as the sister group of the Eubrachyura. Previous hypotheses that the dromiid crab, Hypoconcha, is an anomuran were unsupported, though Dromiidae as presently composed could be paraphyletic. Topologies constrained for podotreme monophyly were found to be significantly worse (P<0.04) than unconstrained topologies under Shimodaira-Hasegawa tests. The clear pattern of podotreme paraphyly and robustness of topologies recovered indicates that Podotremata as a formal concept should be abandoned. Relationships among the eubrachyurans were generally equivocal, though results indicate the majoids or dorippoids were the least derived of the Eubrachyura.
S1668	M. J. Bayly;P. Y. Ladiges	2007	Divergent paralogues of ribosomal DNA in eucalypts (Myrtaceae)	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution							The presence of divergent paralogues of nuclear ribosomal DNA, from the 18Sˆ5.8Sˆ26S cistron, is reported in members of Eucalyptus subg. Eucalyptus. These paralogues, which include non-functional pseudogenes, probably diverged prior to the differentiation of species groups in subg. Eucalyptus. When compared with presumably functional sequences, the pseudogenes show greater sequence variation between species, particularly in the 5.8S gene. They are also characterised by reduced GC content, associated with a reduced number of CpG and CpNpG methylation sites, and an increase in the inferred number of methylation-induced substitutions. Some pseudogenes also lack motifs that are usually conserved in plants, both in ITS1 and the 5.8S gene. Two main lineages of pseudogenes are identified, one isolated from a group of western Australian species, one from a group of eastern Australian species. It is not clear whether these two lineages of pseudogenes are orthologous, or represent independent divergences from functional sequence types. The presence of divergent rDNA paralogues highlights the need for caution when interpreting eucalypt phylogenies based on ITS sequences.
S1827	C. D. Bell	2007	Phylogenetic Placement and Biogeography of the North American Species of Valerianella (Valerianaceae: Dipsacales) based on chloroplast and nuclear DNA	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution							Although Valerianaceae is a relatively small group of angiosperms (ca. 350 species), sample sizes of previous phylogenetic studies have been limited and taxonomic sampling has been usually geographically biased to species from Europe and/or South America. One group that has never been included in any analyses to date is the North American representatives of Valerianella. In this study I sampled 17 additional accessions from Valerianaceae, including six of the 12 described North American Valerianella species and four additional samples of European Valerianella species. Phylogenies based on parsimony and Bayesian methods show strong support for placing the North American Valerianella nested within the European species. These analyses also found Fedia to be nested within Valerianella, making Valerianella paraphyletic, a result consistent with several previously published molecular phylogenies. Divergence times estimated from the molecular data using recently proposed Bayesian Œrelaxed‚ clock methods, suggest Valerianella was in North America by the middle Miocene (ca. 16 to 14 million years ago). These dates would suggest the North American species of Valerianella arrived in the New World just prior to the North Atlantic land bridge (NALB) no longer being a viable conduit for migration. Given the large amount of uncertainty in the divergence time estimates, dispersal across the North Atlantic may not be the only viable alternative to explain the current distribution of Valerianella. However, biogeographic analyses using an explicit model based approach, strongly favor the NALB as the route of dispersal for Valerianella.
S1813	J. W. Borrone;A. W. Meerow;D. N. Kuhn;B. A. Whitlock;R. J. Schnell	2007	The potential of the WRKY gene family for phylogenetic reconstruction: an example from the Malvaceae	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution							The WRKY gene family of transcription factors is involved in several diverse pathways and includes components of plant-specific, ancient regulatory networks. WRKY genes contain one or two highly conserved DNA binding domains interrupted by an intron. We used partial sequences of five independent WRKY loci to assess their potential for phylogeny reconstruction. Loci were originally isolated from Theobroma cacao by PCR with a single pair of degenerate primers; loci-specific primers were subsequently designed. We tested those loci across the sister genera Herrania and Theobroma, with Guazuma ulmifolia as the outgroup. Overall, the combined WRKY matrices performed as well or better than other genes in resolving the intrageneric phylogeny of Herrania and Theobroma as measured by bootstrap values. The ease of isolating numerous, independent WRKY loci from diverse plant species, with a single pair of degenerate primers designed to the highly conserved WRKY domain, renders them extremely useful tools for generating multiple, single- or low-copy nuclear loci for molecular phylogenetic studies at lower taxonomic levels.
S1805	R. T. Brumfield;J. G. Tello;Z. A. Cheviron;M. D. Carling;N. Crochet;K. V. Rosenberg	2007	Phylogenetic conservatism and antiquity of a tropical specialization: army-ant-following in the typical antbirds (Thamnophilidae)	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution							One of the most novel foraging strategies in Neotropical birds is army-ant-following, in which birds prey upon arthropods and small vertebrates flushed from the forest floor by swarm raids of the army-ant Eciton burchelli. This specialization is most developed in the typical antbirds (Thamnophilidae) which are divisible into three specialization categories: (1) those that forage at swarms opportunistically as army-ants move through their territories (occasional followers), (2) those that follow swarms beyond their territories but also forage independently of swarms (regular followers), and (3) those that appear incapable of foraging independently of swarms (obligate followers). Although army-ant-following is one of the great spectacles of tropical forests, basic questions about its evolution remain unaddressed. Using a strongly resolved molecular phylogeny of the typical antbirds, we found that army-ant-following is phylogenetically conserved, having evolved only three times, and that the most likely evolutionary progression was from least (occasional) to more (regular) to most (obligate) specialized, with no reversals from the obligate state. Despite the dependence of the specialists on a single ant species, molecular dating indicates that army-ant-following has persisted in antbirds since the Miocene. These results provide the first characterization of army-ant-following as an ancient and phylogenetically conserved specialization.
S1689	R. W. Bryson;J. Pastorini;F. T. Burbrink;M. R. J. Forstner	2007	A phylogeny of the Lampropeltis mexicana complex (Serpentes: Colubridae) based on mitochondrial DNA sequences suggests evidence for species-level polyphyly within Lampropeltis	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution				10.1016/j.ympev.2006.11.025			The systematic relationships of snakes in the Lampropeltis mexicana complex (L. mexicana, L. alterna, and L. ruthveni) are poorly known despite several taxonomic studies over the last 80 years. Mitochondrial DNA sequences were used to infer the phylogeny of the L. mexicana complex. At least one representative sample from the nine currently recognized species of Lampropeltis was sequenced. Our results suggest that a deep basal split resulted in the divergence of two groups of Lampropeltis, with one group occupying the upland areas of western United States and most of western and central Mexico, and the other northeastern Mexico and the lowland areas of the southern United States. Results also revealed that the L. mexicana complex and Lampropeltis triangulum are polyphyletic, with taxa from both groups nested together in deeply divergent northern and southern clades. These results are incongruent with previous hypotheses of phylogenetic relationships based on morphology, and suggest that morphological characters shared among the various tri-colored Lampropeltis (e.g., hemipenal structure and tri-colored pattern) may be difficult to interpret phylogenetically.
S1889	F. T. Burbrink;F. Fontanella;A. Pyron;T. Guiher;C. Jimenez	2007	Phylogeography across a continent: the evolutionary and demographic history of the North American Racer (Serpentes: Colubridae: Coluber constrictor)	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution							Most phylogeographic studies examine organisms that do not have transcontinental distributions and therefore the genetic and temporal effects of barriers across an entire continent cannot be assessed with respect to a single species. Only 2.3% of all squamates (snakes and lizards) in the United States are distributed continuously across the continent. We examined the phylogeographic structure, lineage age, and demographic patterns using sequences from the mtDNA gene cytochrome b of the racer (Coluber constrictor), one of the few abundant transcontinental snakes that occurs in many biomes. We also compared the signature of population expansion among lineages relative to geographic location, with the expectation that only postglacial expansion will occur in those lineages nearest to or in formerly glaciated areas. Our results indicate that this complex is comprised of six lineages differing greatly in geographic size, with the largest (a central US clade) being ~26 times greater than the smallest (a lineage restricted to the Florida Panhandle and nearby portions of adjacent northern States). Most of the six lineages appear to be separated at previously identified genetic barriers for many vertebrates with similar ranges. Lineage diversification in this species began in the late Miocene, separating populations in the Florida Peninsula from the remainder of the US. Major lineage diversification continued throughout the Pliocene and early Pleistocene. Moreover, four of the six lineages occur east of the Mississippi River, with only two distinctly young (~1.5 mya) lineages found west of the Mississippi River (one occurs west of Continental Divide). All methods of demographic inference, including the mismatch distribution, Fu and Li‚s D* and Tajima‚s D*, and Bayesian Skyline Plots revealed population expansion for every lineage, regardless of size or proximity to formerly glaciated areas, occurring in the mid-to-late Pleistocene, perhaps owing to the generalist ecological nature of this successful snake. Population expansion for lineages found east of the Mississippi River occurred earlier and was much greater than those found west of the River.
S1915	M. J. M. Christenhusz;H. Tuomisto;J. S. Metzgar;K. M. Pryer	2007	Evolutionary relationships within the Neotropical eusporangiate fern genus Danaea (Marattiaceae)	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution							Genera within the eusporangiate fern family Marattiaceae have long been neglected in taxonomic and systematic studies. Here we present the first phylogenetic hypothesis of relationships within the exclusively Neotropical genus Danaea based on a sampling of 60 specimens representing 31 species from various Neotropical sites. We used DNA sequence data from three plastid regions (atpB, rbcL, and trnL-F), field observations, and morphological and geographical information to examine evolutionary patterns. Eleven representatives of five other marattioid genera (Angiopteris, Archangiopteris, Christensenia, Macroglossum, and Marattia) were used to root the topology. We identify three well-supported clades within Danaea that are consistent with morphological characters. Although the plastid markers used here do not provide resolution within some species complexes, our phylogenetic hypothesis does provide a robust framework within which broad questions related to the morphology, taxonomy, biogeography, evolution, and ecology of these ferns can be addressed. Keywords: atpB; Danaea; edaphic specialization; ferns; Marattiaceae; molecular phylogeny; Neotropics; rbcL; speciation; systematics; trnL-F.
S1943	M. Daly;A. Chaudhuri;L. C. Gusmao;E. Rodriguez	2007	Phylogenetic relationships among sea anemones (Cnidaria: Anthozoa: Actiniaria)	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution							Sea anemones are among the most diverse and successful members of the Anthozoan subclass Hexacorallia, being found at all depths and latitudes and in all marine habitats. Members of this order exhibit the greatest variation in anatomy, biology, and life history in Hexacorallia, and lack any morphological synapomorphy. Nonetheless, previous molecular phylogenetic studies have found that Actiniaria is monophyletic with respect to other extant hexacorallians. However, relationships within Actiniaria have remained unresolved, as none of these earlier works have included sufficient taxon sampling to estimate relationships within Actiniaria. We have analyzed sequences from two mitochondrial and two nuclear markers for representatives of approximately half of the family-level diversity within the order, and present the first phylogenetic tree for Actiniaria. We concur with previous studies that have suggested that molecular evolution is unusually slow in this group. We determine that taxonomic groups based on the absence of features tend not to be recovered as monophyletic, but that at least some classical anatomical featured define monophyletic groups.
S1803	J. Eklof;F. Pleijel;P. Sundberg	2007	Phylogeny of benthic Phyllodocidae (Polychaeta) based on morphological and molecular data	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution							A combined molecular (18S rDNA, 28S rDNA, 16S rDNA and COI) and morphological analysis of the benthic phyllodocids is presented for the first time. Nineteen phyllodocids and two outgroup taxa are assessed using parsimony, maximum likelihood and Bayesian analyses. We demonstrate high degrees in homoplasy in the traditionally used morphological phyllodocid characters, and show that all the three current subfamilies Phyllodocinae, Eteoninae and Notophyllinae are non-monophyletic. The genera Eulalia, Eumida, Protomystides, Pseudomystides, Pterocirrus and Sige form a well-supported group, as does Mystides and Nereiphylla. Another clade with strong support includes Eteone and Paranaitis, although with Eteone nested within a paraphyletic Paranaitis. The relationship between these two taxa indicate that the unusual arrangement of modified cirri on the first segments in Eteone is due to a fusion of segment 1 and 2 where the cirri of segment 1 have been reduced. Eulalia is non-monophyletic and should be split, minimally into two groups. Our results are ambiguous regarding the ancestral phyllodocid condition of absenceˆpresence of median antenna or nuchal papilla and uniramous or biramous parapodia, but shows that the absence of cirri on segment 3 (previously an apomorphy, for e.g., Mystides, Pseudomystides and Hesionura) is maximally homoplastic.
S1691	M. G. Fain;C. Krajewski;P. Houde	2007	Phylogeny of "core Gruiformes" (Aves: Grues) and resolution of the Limpkin-Sungrebe problem	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution	43	2	515-529	10.1016/j.ympev.2007.02.015			Opinions on the systematic relationships of birds in the avian order Gruiformes have been as diverse as the families included within it. Despite ongoing debate over monophyly of the order and relationships among its various members, recent opinion has converged on the monophyly of a "core" group of five families classified in the suborder Grues: the rails (Rallidae), the cranes (Gruidae), the Limpkin (Aramidae), the trumpeters (Psophiidae), and the finfoots (Heliornithidae). We present DNA sequence data from four mitochondrial (cytochrome b, 12S rRNA, Valine tRNA, and 16S rRNA), and three nuclear loci (intron 7 of _-fibrinogen, intron 5 of alcohol dehydrogenase-I, and introns 3 through 5 of glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase) to test previous hypotheses of interfamilial relationships within Grues, with particular attention to the enigmatic family Heliornithidae. Separate and combined analyses of these gene sequences confirm the monophyly of Grues as a whole, and of the five families individually, including all three species of Heliornithidae. The preferred topology unambiguously supports relationships among four of the five families, with only the position of Psophiidae remaining equivocal. Bayesian "relaxed-clock" dating methods suggest that the divergences of the three heliornithid species occurred in the mid-Tertiary, suggesting that their present disjunct pantropical distribution is a result of early- to mid-Tertiary dispersal.
S1956	L. G. Giugliano;R. G. Collevatti;G. R. Colli	2007	Molecular dating and phylogenetic relationships among Teiidae (Squamata) inferred by molecular and morphological data	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution	45	1	168-179				We present a phylogenetic analysis of teiid lizards based on partitioned and combined analyses of 12S and 16S mitochondrial DNA sequences, and morphological and ultrastructural characters. There were some divergences between 12S and 16S cladograms, but phylogenetic analyses of the combined molecular data corroborated the monophyly of Tupinambinae, Teiinae, and "cnemidophorines", with high support values. The total combined analysis (molecules + morphology) produced similar results, with well-supported Teiinae and „cnemidophorines‰. We present an evolutionary scenario for the evolution of Teiidae, based on molecular dating of evolutionary events using Bayesian methods, ancestral areas analysis, the fossil record, the geographic distribution of genera, and environmental and geologic changes during the Tertiary. According to this scenario, (1) all current teiid genera, except Aspidoscelis, originated in isolation in South America; (2) most teiid genera originated during the Eocene, a period characterized by savanna expansion in South America; and (3) Cnemidophorus originated in South America, after which some populations dispersed to Central America during the Late Miocene.
S1773	I. Gunduz;M. Jaarola;C. Tez;C. Yeniyurt;P. D. Polly;J. B. Searle	2007	Multigenic and morphometric differentiation of ground squirrels (Spermophilus, Scuiridae, Rodentia) in Turkey, with a description of a new species	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution				10.1016/j.ympev.2007.02.021			This study reports on the molecular phylogenetics of ground squirrels, genus Spermophilus, in Turkey using cytochrome b (1140 bp), part of the D-loop and flanking tRNAs (572 bp), X chromosome (867 - 1051 bp) and Y chromosome (983 - 989 bp) DNA sequences. Individuals also were characterized by karyotype and with geometric morphometric analyses of mandibles and skulls. Two hundred fourteen individuals from 91 localities were studied. All the data support the recognition of a new species in SW Anatolia: the Taurus ground squirrel Spermophilus taurensis sp. nov. The new species has a small distribution in the Taurus Mountains in an area that is a hotspot for biodiversity. Molecular clock analysis suggests that the new species diverged from the European ground squirrel, S. citellus, about 2.5 million years ago and that the ancestor of these two species diverged from the widespread Anatolian ground squirrel, S. xanthoprymnus, about 5 million years ago. Morphometric differentiation in skull and mandible shape among the three species is incomplete, but statistically significant. S. xanthoprymnus is subdivided into five cytochrome b phylogroups and we use these data to infer the location of glacial refugia where the species lived during the last glacial maximum. This study illustrates the potential of combined molecular and morphometric studies to uncover new Anatolian species and to reconstruct their phylogeographic history and the new species is important for squirrel taxonomy and for understanding Eurasian mammal evolution.
S1855	M. Helmkampf;I. Bruchhaus;B. Hausdorf	2007	Multigene analysis of lophophorate and chaetognath phylogenetic relationships	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution							Maximum likelihood and Bayesian inference analyses of seven concatenated fragments of nuclear-encoded housekeeping genes indicate that Lophotrochozoa is monophyletic, i.e., the lophophorate groups Bryozoa, Brachiopoda and Phoronida are more closely related to molluscs and annelids than to Deuterostomia or Ecdysozoa. Lophophorates themselves, however, form a polyphyletic assemblage. The hypotheses that they are monophyletic and more closely allied to Deuterostomia than to Protostomia can be ruled out with both the approximately unbiased test and the expected likelihood weights test. The existence of Phoronozoa, a putative clade including Brachiopoda and Phoronida, has also been rejected. According to our analyses, phoronids instead share a more recent common ancestor with bryozoans than with brachiopods. Platyhelminthes is the sister group of Lophotrochozoa. Together these two constitute Spiralia. Although Chaetognatha appears as the sister group of Priapulida within Ecdysozoa in our analyses, alternative hypothesis concerning chaetognath relationships could not be rejected.
S1821	Z. Hou;J. Fu;S. Li	2007	A molecular phylogeny of the genus Gammarus (Crustacea: Amphipoda) based on mitochondrial and nuclear gene sequences	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution							A phylogeny of the genus Gammarus Fabricius, 1775 was constructed using DNA sequence data from the mitochondrial genes COI and 16S, and the nuclear genes 18S and 28S. Both parsimony and Bayesian analyses were conducted on separate and combined data partitions. The Bayesian phylogeny from the combined analysis was selected as the preferred phylogenetic hypothesis. The hypothesis supports monophyly of the genus Gammarus, paraphyly of the European-North American Gammarus, and monophyly of the Asian Gammarus. The Asian clade was further split into a southeastern group and a northwestern group. The dramatic climate change following the uplift of the Tibetan Plateau was probably the most important factor in triggering the diversification of southeastern and northwestern groups. The genus Sinogammarus is invalid and should be part of the genus Gammarus.
S1822	Z. Hou;J. Fu;S. Li	2007	A molecular phylogeny of the genus Gammarus (Crustacea: Amphipoda) based on mitochondrial and nuclear gene sequences	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution							A phylogeny of the genus Gammarus Fabricius, 1775 was constructed using DNA sequence data from the mitochondrial genes COI and 16S, and the nuclear genes 18S and 28S. Both parsimony and Bayesian analyses were conducted on separate and combined data partitions. The Bayesian phylogeny from the combined analysis was selected as the preferred phylogenetic hypothesis. The hypothesis supports monophyly of the genus Gammarus, paraphyly of the European-North American Gammarus, and monophyly of the Asian Gammarus. The Asian clade was further split into a southeastern group and a northwestern group. The dramatic climate change following the uplift of the Tibetan Plateau was probably the most important factor in triggering the diversification of southeastern and northwestern groups. The genus Sinogammarus is invalid and should be part of the genus Gammarus.
S2025	J. R. Hyde;R. D. Vetter	2007	The origin, evolution, and diversification of rockfishes of the genus Sebastes (Cuvier)	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution	44		490-811				The evolutionary relationships of the livebearing rockfishes of the genus Sebastes have been a point of interest since their original description. With over 65 species found in the northeast Pacific (NEP), 27 in the northwest Pacific (NWP), seven in the Gulf of California (GC), four in the north Atlantic (NA) and at least two in the southern hemisphere (SH), they represent a fascinating lineage for studies of spatial and temporal patterns of dispersal, vicariance and speciation in the marine environment. Previous studies of Sebastes species have attempted to reconstruct their phylogeny using allozyme patterns or portions of a single mitochondrial gene while incompletely sampling the genus, resulting in a partial picture with low statistical support. In this study, genetic analyses using sequence data (5,581 characters) from seven mitochondrial genes (cytochrome b, cytochrome c oxidase subunit 1, 12S rRNA, 16S rRNA, tRNA proline, tRNA threonine and the control region) and two nuclear genes (recombination activating gene 2 and internal transcribed spacer 1), along with a near complete sampling of species, have produced a well supported phylogenetic hypothesis of the relationships between Sebastes species as well as clarifying their position within the scorpaenid subfamily, Sebastinae. Though studies of similar magnitude have been conducted at the family and subfamily level, this represents the most detailed and extensive examination of biogeography and marine speciation within a single, widely distributed marine fish genus. Both Bayesian posterior and maximum parsimony analyses produced highly similar phylogenies suggesting an origin for Sebastes at high-latitudes in the NWP. The majority of previously proposed sub-generic groupings based upon morphology are found to be either para- or polyphletic. Using Bayesian-derived genetic distance measures together with rate smoothing techniques, a molecular clock was applied to the phylogeny. The clock-calibrated data suggest that Sebastes originated in the middle Miocene, concordant with fossil data, and began substantial diversification and dispersal in synchrony with high-latitude cooling and establishment of productive upwelling systems across the north Pacific (NP) in the late Miocene. Contrary to contemporary taxonomic criteria that often group Asian and North American species based on common morphology, the molecular phylogenies tend to indicate geographically circumscribed lineages with no evidence for repeated long distance dispersal between disjunct biogeographic provinces (e.g., Asian species nested within a North American lineage). No examples of large-scale glacial vicariance as would be suggested by Asian and North American sibling species were observed. To the contrary, sibling species tended to be in geographic proximity. While occasional long distance dispersal may occur, such as the single colonization of the SH, and thermal barriers presently exist between the NP, NA, GC, and SH taxa, the observable patterns in Sebastes suggest colonization occurs by stepwise invasion of newly available habitat when temperature conditions permit. Colonization events are spread throughout the sub-generic lineages. Vicariant isolation processes may occur on smaller geographic scales perhaps due to local isolating mechanisms such as glacial advance and retreat, sea level change, and ocean currents. Allopatric differences may be enhanced by a tendency for female mate choice and assortative mating in these livebearing species. The ongoing process of thermal advance and retreat is reflected in contemporary patterns of phylogeographic population genetic structure within species and may be enhanced under climate warming.
S1709	T. Inuma;S. A. Khodaparast;S. Takamatsu	2007	Multilocus phylogenetic analyses within Blumeria graminis, a powdery mildew fungus of cereals	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution							Blumeria graminis, a powdery mildew fungus, is an important plant pathogen that causes serious damage on a variety of cereal crops. In spite of the importance of the pathogen, information on phylogenetic structure within B. graminis is scarce. In this study we conducted phylogenetic analyses of B. graminis based on the DNA sequences of four different DNA regions (ITS, 28S rDNA, chitin synthese 1, and &#223;-tubulin). The analyses revealed that the protein-coding regions have higher amount of phylogenetic signals than rDNA regions and are useful for phylogenetic analyses of B. graminis. The present phylogenetic analyses revealed distinct nine groups in B. graminis isolates used in this study, which was commonly supported by all trees constructed by four DNA regions. Isolates from a single host genus belonged to a single group except for isolates from Lolium and Bromus, in which the isolates were split into two and three groups, respectively. Isolates from Agropyron, Secale and Triticum formed a distinct clade (Triticum clade) with identical or similar DNA sequences. Hordeum clade was sister of the Triticum clade, and Poa and Avena clades were distantly related to Triticum and Hordeum clades. This phylogenetic relationship of B. graminis is well concordant with the level of reproductive isolation between formae spciales and also with phylogeny inferred from a cytological study. Topology comparisons of fungal tree with host tree suggested that host/parasite co-speciation has occurred in B. graminis, while host-jumping also occurred simultaneously.
S1891	T. R. Jackman;A. M. Bauer;E. Greenbaum;F. Glaw;M. Vences	2007	Molecular phylogenetic relationships among species of the Malagasy-Comoran gecko genus Paroedura (Squamata: Gekkonidae)	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution							We use ~3100 bp of mitochondrial (ND2, ND4) and nuclear (RAG1, phosducin) DNA sequence data to recover phylogenetic relationships among 14 of the 16 recognized taxa of the lizard genus Paroedura as well as two undescribed forms. These geckos are endemic to Madagascar and the Comores and are popularly kept and bred by herpetoculturalists. The closest relative of Paroedura is another Indian Ocean leaf-toed gecko, Ebenavia. Both Bayesian inference and maximum parsimony strongly support the monophyly of two major clades within Paroedura that conflict with existing species group assignments based on scale characteristics. Our well-resolved tree elucidates a biogeographic pattern in which eastern Paroedura are most basal and western and south-western species form a monophyletic group. Our data demonstrate the phylogenetic utility of phosducin, a novel marker in squamate phylogenetics, at the intrageneric level.
S1675	S. B. Janssens;K. P. Geuten;T. Viaene;Y. M. Yuan;Y. Song;E. Smets	2007	Phylogenetic Utility of AP3/DEF K-domain and its Molecular Evolution in Impatiens (Balsaminaceae)	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution							APETALA3 (AP3)/DEFICIENS (DEF) is a MADS-box transcription factor that is involved in establishing the identity of petal and stamen floral organs. The AP3/DEF gene lineage has been extensively examined throughout the angiosperms in order to better understand its role in floral diversity and evolution. As a result, a large number of cloned AP3/DEF orthologues are available, which can be used for the design of taxon specific primers for phylogeny reconstruction of close relatives of the group of interest. Following this reasoning, we investigated the phylogenetic utility of the two AP3/DEF paralogues (ImpDEF1 and ImpDEF2) that were recently identified in the genus Impatiens (Balsaminaceae). K-domain introns 4 and 5 of both AP3/DEF duplicates were amplified and sequenced for 59 Impatiens species. Phylogenetic analyses of the separated and combined ImpDEF1 and ImpDEF2 data sets result in highly congruent topologies with the previously obtained chloroplast atpB-rbcL data set. Combination of chloroplast and nuclear matrices results in a well-supported evolutionary hypothesis of Impatiens. Our results show that introns 4 and 5 in AP3/DEF-like genes are a valuable source of characters for phylogenetic studies at the infrageneric level.
S1784	M. Le;W. P. McCord;J. B. Iverson	2007	On the paraphyly of the genus Kachuga (Testudines: Geoemydidae)	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution							
S1887	J. E. Light;M. S. Hafner	2007	Cophylogeny and disparate rates of evolution in sympatric lineages of chewing lice on pocket gophers	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution							Although molecular-based phylogenetic studies of hosts and parasites are increasingly common in the literature, no study to date has examined 2 congeneric lineages of parasites that live in sympatry on the same lineage of hosts. This study examines phylogenetic relationships among chewing lice (Phthiraptera: Trichodectidae) of the Geomydoecus coronadoi and G. mexicanus species complexes and compares these to phylogenetic patterns in their hosts (pocket gophers of the rodent family Geomyidae). Sympatry of congeneric lice provides a natural experiment to test the hypothesis that closely related lineages of parasites will respond similarly to the same host. Sequence data from the mitochondrial COI and the nuclear EF-1a genes confirm that the 2 louse complexes are reciprocally monophyletic and that individual clades within each species complex parasitize a different species of pocket gopher. Phylogenetic comparisons reveal that both louse complexes show a significant pattern of cophylogeny with their hosts. Comparisons of rates of nucleotide substitution at 4-fold degenerate sites in the COI gene indicate that both groups of lice have significantly higher basal mutation rates than their hosts. The 2 groups of lice have similar basal rates of mutation, but lice of the G. coronadoi complex show significantly elevated rates of nucleotide substitution at all sites. These rate differences are hypothesized to result from population-level phenomena, such as effective population size, founder effects, and drift, that influence rates of nucleotide substitution.
S1698	P. Lymberakis;N. Poulakakis;G. Manthalou;C. S. Tsigenopoulos;A. Magoulas;M. Mylonas	2007	Mitochondrial Phylogeography of Rana (Pelophylax) populations in the Eastern Mediterranean region	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution							Phylogenetic relationships in the western fraction of Rana (Pelophylax) have not been resolved till now, even though several works have been devoted to the subject. Here, we infer phylogenetic relationships among the species distributed in the area of the eastern Mediterranean, comparing partial mitochondrial DNA sequences for the cytochrome b and 16S rRNA genes. The obtained molecular data clearly indicate that Western Palearctic water frogs underwent a basal radiation into at least 3 major lineages (the perezi, the lessonae, and the rindibunda/kurtmuelleri lineages) advocating an upper Miocene speciation. Moreover, we consider that within the rindibunda/kurtmuelleri lineage, R. (P.) ridibunda, R. (P.) epeirotica, R. (P.) cretensis, R. (P.) bedriagae, R. (P.) cerigensis and R. (P.) kurtmuelleri were differentiated from a common ancestor through a series of vicariant and dispersal events, during the last ~5 Mya, even though the specific rank of some taxa may be questionable, such as R. cerigensis in respect with R. bedriagae and R. kurtmuelleri in respect with R. ridibunda.
S1763	J. S. Makokha;A. M. Bauer;W. Mayer;C. A. Matthee	2007	Nuclear and mtDNA-based phylogeny of southern African sand lizards, Pedioplanis (Sauria: Lacertidae)	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution							The diversity of lacertid lizards in Africa is highest in the southern African subcontinent, where over two-thirds of the species are endemic. With eleven currently recognized species, Pedioplanis is the most diverse among the southern African genera. In this study we use 2200 nucleotide positions derived from two mitochondrial markers (ND2 and 16S rRNA) and one nuclear gene (RAG-1) to (i) assess the phylogeny of Pedioplanis and (ii) estimate divergence time among lineages using the relaxed molecular clock method. Individual analyses of each gene separately supported different nodes in the phylogeny and the combined analysis yielded more well supported relationships. We present the first well resolved gene tree for the genus Pedioplanis and this is largely congruent with a phylogeny derived from morphology. Contrary to previous suggestions Heliobolus / Nucras are sister to Pedioplanis. The genus Pedioplanis is monophyletic, with P. burchelli / P. laticeps forming a clade that is sister species to all the remaining congeners. Two distinct geographic lineages can be identified within the widespread P. namaquensis; one occurs in Namibia, while the other occurs in South Africa. The P. undata species complex is monophyletic, but one of its constituent species, P. inornata, is paraphyletic. Relationships among the subspecies of P. lineoocellata are much more complex than previously documented. An isolated population previously assigned to P. l. pulchella is paraphyletic and sister to the three named subspecies. The phylogeny identifies two biogeographical clades that probably diverged during the mid-Miocene, after the development of the Benguella Current. This probably led to habitat changes associated with climate and, in conjunction with physical barriers (Great Escarpment), contributed towards speciation within the genus Pedioplanis.
S1924	M. L. Ramon;M. L. Knope	2007	Molecular Support for Marine Sculpin (Cottidae; Oligocottinae) Diversification During the Transition from the Subtidal to Intertidal Habitat in the Northeastern Pacific Ocean	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution							Sculpins in the genera Ruscarius, Artedius, Clinocottus, and Oligocottus are common intertidal and subtidal benthic fishes of the Northeastern Pacific Ocean. While there has been a long history of attempts to reconstruct the evolutionary relationships within this clade, studies have largely resulted in conflicting conclusions. Current ideas regarding the limits of species and genera in this subfamily (Oligocottinae) and their branching order are based primarily on morphology (Bolin 1944, 1947). The primary objectives of this study are: (a) to determine if the phylogenetic relationships inferred from DNA characters are concordant with those inferred from morphological characters and (b) to determine if a habitat shift from the subtidal to the intertidal environment resulted in the diversification of the group. Cytochrome b and Nicotinamide Adenine Dinucleotide Dehydrogenase subunit one mitochondrial gene fragments and one nuclear intron (S7 ribosomal protein) were sequenced in order to infer the phylogenetic relationships within this subfamily. Maximum likelihood and Bayesian algorithms were employed to reconstruct phylogenetic trees. We found that several genera in this clade are not monophyletic and that there is a clear phylogenetic signal indicating that a habitat shift from the subtidal to the intertidal habitat has resulted in the diversification of the Oligocottinae.
S1722	M. V. Sanchez-Puerta;T. R. Bachvaroff;C. F. Delwiche	2007	Sorting wheat from chaff in multi-gene analyses of chlorophyll-c containing plastids	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution							Photosynthetic eukaryotes contain primary, secondary or tertiary plastids, depending on the source of the organelle (a cyanobacterium or a photosynthetic eukaryote). Plastid phylogeny is relatively well investigated, but molecular phylogenies have conflicted as a function of gene choice, taxon-representations, and analytical method. To better understand the influences of these variables, we performed analyses of a multi-gene data set based on 62 plastid-associated genes of 15 taxa representing the major plastid lineages. In an attempt to distinguish phylogenetic signal from non-phylogenetic patterns, we analyzed the data using a wide range of phylogenetic methods and examined the effect of covarion evolution and compositional bias. The data suggest that the chlorophyll c-containing plastids are monophyletic and acquired their plastids from the red algae after the emergence of the Cyanidiales. The relationships among chl c-containing plastids are particularly hard to resolve. This is the largest data set used for this purpose; the analyses show that cryptophyte plastids are sister to other chl c-containing plastids, and haptophyte and peridinin-containing dinoflagellate plastids are closely related.
S1936	J. A. Schulte Ii;K. d Queiroz	2007	Phylogenetic Relationships and Heterogeneous Evolutionary Processes among Phrynosomatine Sand Lizards (Squamata, Iguanidae) Revisited	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution							Phylogenetic analyses of DNA sequences were conducted to evaluate four alternative hypotheses of phrynosomatine sand lizard relationships. Sequences comprising 2871 aligned base pair positions representing the regions spanning ND1-COI and cyt b-tRNAThr of the mitochondrial genome from all recognized sand lizard species were analyzed using unpartitioned parsimony and likelihood methods, likelihood methods with assumed partitions, Bayesian methods with assumed partitions, and Bayesian mixture models. The topology (Uma, (Callisaurus, (Cophosaurus, Holbrookia))) and thus monophyly of the „earless‰ taxa, Cophosaurus and Holbrookia, is supported by all analyses. Previously proposed topologies in which Uma and Callisaurus are sister taxa and those in which Holbrookia is the sister group to all other sand lizard taxa are rejected using both parsimony and likelihood-based significance tests with the combined, unparitioned data set. Bayesian hypothesis tests also reject those topologies using six assumed partitioning strategies, and the two partitioning strategies presumably associated with the most powerful tests also reject a third previously proposed topology, in which Callisaurus and Cophosaurus are sister taxa. For both maximum likelihood and Bayesian methods with assumed partitions, those partitions defined by codon position and tRNA stem and nonstems explained the data better than other strategies examined. Bayes factor estimates comparing results of assumed partitions versus mixture models suggest that mixture models perform better than assumed partitions when the latter were not based on functional characteristics of the data, such as codon position and tRNA stem and nonstems. However, assumed partitions performed better than mixture models when functional differences were incorporated. We reiterate the importance of accounting for heterogeneous evolutionary processes in the analysis of complex data sets and emphasize the importance of implementing mixed model likelihood methods.
S1749	K. Sotiropoulos;K. Eleftherakos;G. Dzukic;M. L. Kalezic;A. Legakis;R. M. Polymeni	2007	Phylogeny and biogeography of the alpine newt Mesotriton alpestris (Salamandridae, Caudata), inferred from mtDNA sequences	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution							In this paper, we performed phylogenetic analyses of Mesotriton alpestris populations from the entire range of species distribution, using fragments of two mtDNA genes, cytochrome b (309 bp) and 16S rRNA (~500 bp). Sequence diversity patterns and phylogenetic analyses reveal the existence of a relict lineage (Clade A) of late Miocene origin, comprising populations from south-eastern Serbia. This lineage is proposed to be ancestor to a western and an eastern lineage, which diverged during the middle Pliocene. The western lineage is further divided in two clades (Clades B, C) of middle Pliocene origin that represent populations from Italy (B) and populations from central Europe and Iberia (C). Further subdivision, dated back to the middle-late Pliocene, was found within the eastern lineage, representing southern (Clade D) and central-northern (Clade E) Balkan populations respectively. Extensive sequence divergence, implying greater isolation in multiple refugia, is found within eastern clades, while the western clades seem to have been involved in the colonization of central, western and north-eastern Europe from a hypothetical refugium in central Europe. The extent of divergence does not support the current taxonomy indicating cryptic speciation in the Balkans, while paedomorphic lineages were found to have been evolved during early-middle Pleistocene probably as a response to the ongoing dramatic climatic oscillations.
S1748	P. Trénel;M. H. G. Gustafsson;W. J. Baker;C. B. Asmussen-Lange;J. Dransfield;F. Borchsenius	2007	Mid-Tertiary dispersal, not Gondwanan vicariance explains distribution patterns in the wax palm subfamily (Ceroxyloideae: Arecaceae)	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution							The Ceroxyloideae is a small but heterogeneous subfamily of palms (Arecaceae, Palmae). It includes a Caribbean lineage (tribe Cyclospathae), a southern hemisphere disjunction (tribe Ceroxyleae), and an amphi-Andean element (tribe Phytelepheae), until recently considered a distinct subfamily (Phytelephantoideae) due to its highly derived morphology. A variety of hypotheses have been proposed to account for the biogeography of the subfamily, involving Gondwanan vicariance, austral interplate dispersal from South America to Australia via Antarctica, Andean orogeny and Pleistocene refuges. We assessed the systematic classification and biogeography of the group based on a densely sampled phylogeny using >5.5 kb of DNA sequences from three plastid and two nuclear genomic regions. The subfamily and each of its three tribes were resolved as monophyletic with high support. Divergence time estimates based on penalized likelihood and Bayesian dating methods indicate that Gondwanan vicariance is highly unlikely as an explanation for basic disjunctions in tribe Ceroxyleae. Alternative explanations include a mid-Tertiary trans-Atlantic/trans-African dispersal track and the „lemurian stepping stones‰ hypothesis. Austral interplate dispersal of Oraniopsis to Australia could have occurred, but apparently only in the mid-Eocene/early Oligocene interval after global cooling had begun. Our data do not support Pleistocene climatic changes as drivers for speciation in the Andean-centered Phytelepheae as previously proposed. Radiation in this tribe coincides largely with the major uplift of the Andes, favoring Andean orogeny over Pleistocene climatic changes as a possible speciation-promoting factor in this tribe.
S1849	K. C. Wollenberg;F. Glaw;A. Meyer;M. Vences	2007	Molecular phylogeny of Malagasy reed frogs, Heterixalus, and the relative performance of bioacoustics and color-patterns for resolving their systematics	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution				10.1016/j.ympev.2007.06.024			The members of the genus Heterixalus constitute one of the endemic frog radiations in Madagascar. Here we present a complete species-level phylogeny based on basepairs of three nuclear and four mitochondrial markers to clarify the phylogenetic relationships among and within species of this genus, as well as the phylogenetic position of the monospecific Seychellean Tachycnemis seychellensis. Although the performance to resolve supported clades of Heterixalus species differed among the investigated gene fragments when analyzed separately, we could identify five well-supported species groups within Heterixalus in the combined analysis of all gene fragments. Our data strongly support a HeterixalusˆTachycnemis clade, and indicate the probable monophyly of Heterixalus placed sister to Tachycnemis. However, the split of these lineages may have happened in a short interval of time, leading to an unstable placement of Tachycnemis in the single-gene fragment phylogenies. Referring to the hitherto existing classification of Heterixalus, which is predominantly based on chromatic and bioacoustic characters, we examined the relative performance of these data sets relative to our molecular phylogeny. A Bayesian phylogeny reconstructed with a bioacoustic data set yielded a higher resemblance to the molecular phylogeny than a phylogeny constructed using a chromatic data set, which supports the use of bioacoustic characters for systematic analyses of these anurans.
S1800	A. Zaldivar-Riverón;S. A. Belokobylskij;V. León-Regagnon;J. J. Martinez;R. Briceno;D. L. J. Quicke	2007	A single origin of gall association in a group of parasitic wasps with disparate morphologies	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution							The braconid wasp subfamily Doryctinae mainly comprises idiobiont ectoparasitoids of other insect larvae. In recent years, however, members of a few genera have been discovered to be associated with galls from various unrelated host plant families, with some of these being gall inducers whereas others are suspected as being predators of gallers. Because of their considerable morphological differences, these gall-associated taxa traditionally have been placed in separate tribes or even in other subfamilies. In this study, we investigate the phylogenetic relationships among representatives of a number of different doryctine genera, including five of its seven gall-associated genera using two genetic markers. Here we analyzed the length-variable 28S sequence data based on secondary structure both excising the unalignable regions and recoding them according to indel length. In addition, multiple alignments were carried out with a range of gap-opening and extension parameters. The combined (28S + CO1) phylogenetic hypotheses obtained, both excluding and recoding the unalignable regions, recover a clade comprising the five gall-associated genera, and most of the analyses using multiple alignments also support this relationship. These results support a scenario in which secondary phytophagy evolves from initially attacking primary gall-forming hosts. The relationships recovered are also more congruent with a model that explains the macroevolution of insect plant association in the Doryctinae as reflecting geographic proximity rather than host plant relationships. Further, our phylogenetic hypotheses consistently show that one of the main morphological features employed in the higher level classification of the Doryctinae is actually highly homoplastic.
S1690	L. B. Zhang;M. P. Simmons;S. S. Renner	2007	A phylogeny of Anisophylleaceae based on six nuclear and plastid loci: Ancient disjunctions and recent dispersal between South America, Africa	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution							The Anisophylleaceae comprise 29-34 species of shrubs and trees occurring in lowland forests and swamps in tropical Africa, Asia, and South America. These species are placed in four genera with disjunct geographic distributions; Anisophyllea has 25-30 species in South America, Africa, and Malesia; Combretocarpus has one species in Sumatra and Borneo; Poga one species in equatorial Africa; and Polygonanthus two in the Amazon Basin. Here we use a phylogeny based on six nuclear and plastid loci sequenced for 15 species representing the four genera to infer their relationships and the relative and absolute ages of the range disjunctions. Combretocarpus is sister to the other three genera, and Polygonanthus then sister to Poga and Anisophyllea. Ansiophyllea, represented by 12 species from all three continents, is monophyletic. A relaxed Bayesian clock calibrated with the oldest fossils from a relevant outgroup, Tetramelaceae, suggests that the disjunctions between Combretocarpus, Poga, and Polygonanthus date back to the Cretaceous, whereas the intercontinental disjunctions within Anisophyllea appear to date back only some 22-23 million years and thus probably result from long-distance dispersal.
S1702	S. A. Smith;R. A. Sadlier;A. M. Bauer;T. R. Jackman	2007	Molecular phylogeny of the scincid lizards of New Caledonia and adjacent areas: evidence for a single origin of the endemic skinks of Tasmantis	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution	43	3	1151-1166	10.1016/j.ympev.2007.02.007			We use ~1900bp of mitochondrial (ND2) and nuclear (c-mos and Rag-1) DNA sequence data to recover phylogenetic relationships among 58 species and 26 genera of Eugongylus group scincid lizards from New Caledonia, Lord Howe Island, New Zealand, Australia and New Guinea. Taxon sampling for New Caledonian forms was nearly complete. We find that the endemic skink genera occurring on New Caledonia, New Zealand and Lord Howe Island, which make up the Gondwanan continental block Tasmantis, form a monophyletic group. Within this group New Zealand and New Zealand + Lord Howe Island form monophyletic clades. These clades are nested within the radiation of skinks in New Caledonia. All of the New Caledonian genera are monophyletic, except Lioscincus. The Australian and New Guinean species form a largely unresolved polytomy with the Tasmantis clade. New Caledonian representatives of the more widespread genera Emoia and Cryptoblepharus are more closely related to the non-Tasmantis taxa than to the endemic New Caledonian genera. Using ND2 sequences and the calibration estimated for the agamid Laudakia, we estimate that the diversification of the Tasmantis lineage began at least 12.7 million years ago. However, using combined ND2 and c-mos data and the calibration estimated for pygopod lizards suggests the lineage is 35.4-40.74 million years old. Our results support the hypothesis that skinks colonized Tasmantis by over-water dispersal initially to New Caledonia, then to Lord Howe Island, and finally to New Zealand.
S1802	E. M. Lemmon;A. R. Lemmon;J. T. Collins;J. A. Lee-Yaw;D. C. Cannatella	2007	Phylogeny-based delimitation of species boundaries and contact zones in the trilling chorus frogs (Pseudacris)	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution	44	3	1068-1082	10.1016/j.ympev.2007.04.010			Although the trilling chorus frogs (subclade within Pseudacris: Hylidae) have been important in studies of speciation, continental patterns of genetic diversity within and among species have not been elucidated. As a result, this North American clade has been the subject of substantial taxonomic debate. In this study, we examined the phylogenetic relationships among the trilling Pseudacris and tested previously hypothesized scenarios for speciation using 2.4 kb of mitochondrial 12S and 16S rRNA from 253 populations. Bayesian phylogenetic analyses, in combination with published morphological and behavioral data, support recognition of at least nine species, including an undescribed species from the south-central United States. Evidence is presented for substantial geographic subdivision within P. brachyphona (northern and southern clades) and P. feriarum (coastal and inland clades). Discordance between morphology/behavior and molecular data in several individuals suggests occasional hybridization between sympatric species. These results require major revision of range limits for several taxa, in particular, P. maculata, P. triseriata, and P. feriarum. Hypothesis tests using parametric bootstrapping strongly reject previously proposed scenarios for speciation in the group. The tests also support recognition of the geographically restricted taxon P. kalmi as a distinct species. Results of this study provide both a firm phylogenetic basis for future studies of speciation in the trilling Pseudacris and a taxonomic framework for conservation efforts.
S1868	A. Antonelli	2008	Higher level phylogeny and evolutionary trends in Campanulaceae subfam. Lobelioideae: Molecular signal overshadows morphology	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution	46	1	1-18	10.1016/j.ympev.2007.06.015			Relationships within the subfamily Lobelioideae in Campanulaceae are inferred from DNA sequence variation in the rbcL and ndhF genes, and the trnL-F region including the trnL intron and the trnL-F intergenic spacer. Results derived from Bayesian and parsimony analyses provide evidence for the long-suspected paraphyly of the genus Lobelia, comprising over 400 species as presently circumscribed. The perennial dwarf herbs belonging to the Andean genus Lysipomia are sister to a group comprising the Neotropical shrubs Burmeistera, Centropogon, and Siphocampylus. Giant lobelioids from the Hawaiian Islands, Brazil, Africa, and Sri Lanka form a strongly supported group. Character optimizations on the phylogenetic tree reveal that shifts in fruit types and lignification have occurred much more commonly than generally assumed. The main clades in the subfamily are outlined, which largely contradict previous classifications based on morphology.
S1975	D. Bickford;D. C. Cannatella	2008	Molecular phylogeny of the Papuan microhylid frogs (Anura: Microhylidae: Asterophryinae and Genyophryninae) inferred from 12S and 16S mitochondrial DNA sequences	Molecular phylogenetics and Evolution							The Papuan microhylid frogs are an adaptive radiation of more than 200 species in at least 18 genera, mostly found on the world‚s largest tropical island, New Guinea. We investigated the evolutionary relationships among these frogs using 2.3kb from the 12S and 16S rRNA mitochondrial genes. Maximum parsimony, Bayesian inference, and maximum likelihood methods all largely agree, confirming the group‚s monophyly and revealing many weaknesses in current taxonomy and understanding of the systematics of the group. Results of phylogenetic analyses suggest that (1) currently recognized Papuan subfamilies, Genyophryninae and Asterophryinae, should be combined into the Asterophryinae; (2) currently recognized genera Cophixalus and Callulops are polyphyletic, and (3) previous phylogenetic hypotheses can be refuted with these new molecular data. Genetic divergence within Papuan microhylids is tremendous compared to that within other frog families. We hypothesize this to be primarily due to a relatively high rate of molecular evolution during adaptive radiation.
S2033	T. L. P. Couvreur;J. E. Richardson;R. H. J. Erkens;M. S. M. Sosef;L. C. Chatrou	2008	Evolution of syncarpy and other morphological characters in African Annonaceae: a posterior mapping approach	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution	47		302-318				The congenital fusion of carpels, or syncarpy, is considered a major key innovation within angiosperms. Two hypotheses on the isolated evolutionary origin of syncarpy in two African Annonaceae genera, Monodora and Isolona, were tested: multiplication of a single carpel vs. fusion of a moderate number of carpels. In addition, the evolution of six morphological characters was studied. The Bayesian posterior mapping approach was used to account for mapping and phylogenetic uncertainty and allow multiple changes along the branches. The exact phylogenetic relationships of Monodora and Isolona were elucidated by including all closely related genera. Six chloroplast regions were sequenced and analyzed using maximum parsimony and Bayesian inference methods. Our results strongly support the hypothesis that syncarpy arose by fusion of an ancestrally moderate number of carpels. In addition, a well supported African clade comprising 12 endemic African genera nested within the long-branch clade was recovered. The results presented here provide a better understanding on the evolution of syncarpy in Annonaceae and within angiosperms in general.
S2117	A. N. Egan;K. A. Crandall	2008	Incorporating gaps as phylogenetic characters across eight DNA regions: Ramifications for North American Psoraleeae (Leguminosae)	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution	46		532-546				The impact of including insertion/deletion events as phylogenetic characters was explored within North American Psoraleeae (Leguminosae). This comprehensive analysis of the impact of gap character incorporation spanned four different indel coding schemes, gaps coded as missing characters, simple binary characters, multi-state characters, and as a 5th state, across two optimality criteria: maximum parsimony and Bayesian Inference. Two nuclear (ITS and Waxy) and six chloroplast (trnS/G, trnL/F, trnK, matK, trnD/T, and rpoB-trnC) DNA regions were sequenced from 43 species of North American Psoraleeae as the foundation of the study. Our results suggest that gaps can provide a substantial percentage of informative characters and can increase phylogenetic resolution and nodal branch support. Phylogenetic signal within indels was higher in chloroplast regions relative to nuclear regions, demonstrating their inclusion as especially important in chloroplast-based phylogenetic studies. Phylogenetic analysis of generic relationships within Psoraleeae is largely congruent with that proposed by Grimes (1990) with a few exceptions. New World species are supported as a monophyletic group. Our analyses suggest that Otholobium may need to be split into two genera and that Psoralidium is polyphyletic and will require movement of Psoralidium tenuiflorum to Pediomelum.
S2065	M. A. Frey;G. J. Vermeij	2008	Molecular systematics and historical biogeography of a circumtropical group of gastropods (Genus: Nerita): implications for regional diversity patterns in the marine tropics	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution							To determine how historical processes, namely speciation, extinction, and dispersal, have contributed to regional species diversity patterns across the marine tropics, we examined the biogeographical history of a circumtropical genus of intertidal gastropods. A species-level phylogeny of Nerita, representing approximately 87% of extant species, was developed from 1608 bp of mitochondrial (COI and 16S) and nuclear (ATPSa) markers. Systematic relationships generally corresponded to prior classifications; however, comprehensive sampling revealed a number of previously undetected ESUs. Using the resulting tree as a framework, we combined geographical distributions and fossil evidence to reconstruct ancestral ranges, produce a time-calibrated chronogram, and estimate diversification rates. Analyses revealed two monophyletic eastern Pacific + Atlantic (EPA) clades, each of which likely split from an Indo-West Pacific (IWP) sister clade prior to an early Miocene Tethys Seaway closure. More recent diversification throughout the IWP appears to have been driven by both vicariance and dispersal events; EPA diversity has been further shaped by speciation across the Central American Seaway prior to its closure and dispersal across the Atlantic. Despite the latter, inter-regional dispersal has been rare, and likely contributes little to regional diversity patterns. Similarly, infrequent transitions into temperate regions combined with reduced diversification rates may explain low diversity in West and South Pacific clades. Since origination, Nerita diversification appears remarkably constant, with the exception of a lag in the late Eocene-early Oligocene and elevated rates in the late Oligocene-early Miocene. However, a comparison among regions suggested that IWP clades have experienced, on average, higher rates of speciation. Fossil evidence indicates that the EPA likely witnessed greater extinction relative to the IWP. We propose that regional differences in species diversity in Nerita have been largely shaped by differential rates of speciation and extinction.
S2194	A. M. Goebel;T. A. Ranker;P. S. Corn;R. G. Olmstead	2008	Mitochondrial DNA Evolution in the Anaxyrus boreas Species Group	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution							The Anaxyrus boreas species group currently comprises four species in western North America including the broadly distributed Anaxyrus boreas, and three localized species, A. nelsoni, A. exsul and A. canorus. Phylogenetic analyses of the mtDNA 12S rDNA, cytochrome oxidase I, control region, and restriction sites data, identified three major haplotype clades. The Northwest clade (NW) includes both subspecies of A. boreas and divergent minor clades in the middle Rocky Mountains, coastal, and central regions of the west and Pacific Northwest. The Southwest (SW) clade includes A. exsul, A. nelsoni, and minor clades in southern California. Anaxyrus canorus, previously identified as paraphyletic, has populations in both the NW and SW major clades. The Eastern major clade (E) includes three divergent lineages from southern Utah, the southern Rocky Mountains, and north of the Great Basin at the border of Utah and Nevada. These results identify new genetic variation in the eastern portion of the toad‚s range and are consistent with previous regional studies from the west coast. Low levels of control region sequence divergence between major clades (2.2-4.7 % uncorrected pair-wise distances) are consistent with Pleistocene divergence and suggest that the phylogeographic history of the group was heavily influenced by dynamic Pleistocene glacial and climatic changes, and especially pluvial changes, in western North America. Results reported here may impact conservation plans in that the current taxonomy does not reflect the diversity in the group.
S2047	J. M. Guayasamin;S. Castroviejo-Fisher;J. Ayarzaguena;L. Trueb;C. Vila	2008	Phylogenetic relationships of glassfrogs (Centrolenidae) based on mitochondrial and nuclear genes	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution							Glassfrogs (family Centrolenidae) represent an exceptionally diverse group among Neotropical anurans, but their evolutionary relationships never have been assessed from a molecular perspective. Mitochondrial and nuclear markers were used to develop a novel hypothesis of centrolenid phylogeny. Ingroup sampling included 100 terminals, with 78 (53%) of the named species in the family, representing most of the phenotypic diversity described for the group. Thirty-five species representing taxa traditionally associated with glassfrogs were used as outgroups. Gene sampling consisted of complete or partial sequences of three mitochondrial (12S, 16S, ND1) and three nuclear markers (c-myc exon 2, RAG1, POMC) for a total of ~4362 bp. Phylogenies were estimated using maximum parsimony, maximum likelihood, and Bayesian analyses for individual genes and combined datasets. The separate analysis of mitochondrial and nuclear datasets allowed us to clarify the relationships within glassfrogs; also, we corroborate the sister-group relationship between Allophryne ruthveni and glassfrogs. The new phylogeny differs significantly from all previous morphology-based hypotheses of relationships, and shows that hypotheses based on few traits are likely to misrepresent evolutionary history. Traits previously hypothesized as unambiguous synapomorphies are shown to be homoplastic, and all genera in the current taxonomy (Centrolene, Cochranella, Hyalinobatrachium, Nymphargus) are found to be poly- or paraphyletic. The new topology implies a South American origin of glassfrogs and reveals allopatric speciation as the most important speciation mechanism. The phylogeny profoundly affects the traditional interpretations of glassfrog taxonomy, character evolution, and biogeography˜topics that now require more extensive evaluation in future studies.
S2184	D. Huang;R. Meier;P. A. Todd;L. M. Chou	2008	More evidence for pervasive paraphyly in scleractinian corals: systematic study of Southeast Asian Faviidae (Cnidaria; Scleractinia) based on molecular and morphological data	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution							Coral taxonomy and systematics continue to be plagued by a host of problems. Due to high phenotypic variability within species, morphological approaches have often failed to recognize natural taxa, and molecular techniques have yet to be applied to many groups. Here, we summarize the levels of paraphyly found for scleractinian corals and test, based on new data, whether paraphyly is also a significant problem in the Faviidae, the second-most speciose hermatypic scleractinian family. Using both DNA sequence and morphological data we find that, regardless of analysis technique (maximum parsimony, maximum likelihood and Bayesian likelihood), many conventional taxonomic groups are not monophyletic. Based on two mitochondrial markers (COI and a noncoding region) that we amplified for 81 samples representing 41 faviid species and 13 genera, five genera that are represented by more than one species are paraphyletic, as is the family Faviidae. The morphological characters currently used to identify these corals similarly fail to recover many genera. Furthermore, trees based on both data types are incongruent, and total evidence analysis does little to salvage conventional taxonomic groupings. Morphological convergence, phenotypic variability in response to the environment, and recent speciation are likely causes for these conflicts, which suggest that the present classification of corals is in need of a major overhaul. We propose more detailed studies of problematic faviid taxa, using a set of standardized morphological, mitochondrial, and nuclear genetic markers to facilitate combining of data.
S2200	K. L. Ilves;E. B. Taylor	2008	Molecular resolution of the systematics of a problematic group of fishes (Teleostei: Osmeridae) and evidence for morphological homoplasy	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution							Relationships among the species of Northern Hemisphere smelts (family Osmeridae) have long been debated in the fish systematics literature. Eight independent studies based on morphological characters failed to reach any consensus on osmerid interrelationships. We reconstruct the osmerid phylogeny based on DNA sequence data from three mitochondrial (cytb, 16S, 12S) and three nuclear (ITS2, S71, RAG1) gene regions from multiple individuals of the 14 species in 6 genera, using the Japanese ayu (Plecoglossus altivelis) as the outgroup. Analyses with different combinations of nuclear and mitochondrial datasets yielded a generally well-resolved phylogeny of the genera that conflicts with previous hypotheses of osmerid interrelationships, and Shimodaira-Hasegawa tests suggest our topology with the current molecular dataset is significantly better than earlier reconstructions. In addition, mapping 114 morphological characters used in previous studies onto our phylogeny shows widespread homoplasy, which is likely the source of the systematic disagreement produced in earlier works.
S2083	P. B. Klimov;B. M. Oconnor	2008	Origin and higher-level relationships of psoroptidian mites (Acari: Astigmata: Psoroptidia): Evidence from three nuclear genes	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution	47		1135-1156	10.1016/j.ympev.2007.12.025			Phylogenic relationships of the Psoroptidia, a group of primarily parasitic mites of vertebrates, were inferred from three nuclear genes (EF-1?, 18S, 28SD1-5; 4199 nt aligned) from 34 outgroup and 92 ingroup taxa. Our analysis strongly supports the monophyly of Psoroptidia, which arose within free-living Astigmata. The family Heterocoptidae (insect parasites) was identified as the sister group of Psoroptidia, and the family Hypoderatidae (vertebrate nest inhabitants in non-deutonymphal instars and subcutaneous parasites as deutonymphs) was shown to be the sister-group of the Psoroptidia + Heterocoptidae clade. The psoroptidian bird mite superfamily Pterolichoidea (including Freyanoidea) shared a common ancestor with members of three other previously recognized superfamilies, Analgoidea (bird mites), Sarcoptoidea (mammalian mites), and Pyroglyphoidea (free-living nidicoles, including house dust mites, and bird parasites). Our analysis renders the bird mite superfamily Analgoidea as a paraphyletic assemblage that includes the ancestors of the mammalian and free-living lineages, indicating the need to either include all these mites in a single group, Sarcoptoidea s. l., or split them into many smaller monophyletic groups. The families Psoroptidae and Lobalgidae (mammalian skin parasites) cluster with Pyroglyphidae, Turbinoptidae (upper respiratory track parasites of birds), Psoroptoididae (downy feather mites), and Epidermoptidae (skin parasites of birds). These relationships (the epidermoptid-psoroptid complex), recovered by combined and separate analyses of all gene partitions, were previously suspected based on some morphological evidence, but evidence has been dismissed as resulting from convergence based on similar parasitic ecologies. Another major group of mammalian mites recovered by only ribosomal genes includes the fur mites Chirodiscidae, Myocoptidae, and Listrophoridae, plus the family Gastronyssidae (endoparasites of mammals). Mammalian skin parasites, Rhyncoptidae and several bird mite taxa (Strelkoviacarus, Dermoglyphidae) form a sister-clade and this grouping is weakly supported by all genes. We present a statistical evaluation of certain alternative hypotheses concerning the monophyly and higher-level relationships of Psoroptidia in Maximum Parsimony, Maximum Likelihood, and Bayesian frameworks. Previous morphological and molecular hypotheses suggesting that Psoroptidia is not monophyletic were rejected statistically by currently available molecular data, and the results are robust under a range of analytical and partition strategies. The rejected hypothesis of a monophyletic Sarcoptoidea (a group joining mammal-associated mites very weakly supported by morphological data) and the strong support for the epidermoptid-psoroptid complex indicate that current classification criteria for the three non-pterolichoid superfamiles have been influenced by host preferences and need to be revised. Our other results (the relationships of Heterocoptidae and Hypoderatidae and Psoroptidia; the monophyly of the superfamily Pterolichoidea (including Freyanoidea)) remain sensitive to analytical methods and assumptions, despite the fact that some relationships (e. g., the former) were consistently recovered by all gene partitions or their combinations, often with very good support.
S2207	J. E. Light;D. L. Reed	2008	Multigene analysis of phylogenetic relationships and divergence times of primate sucking lice (Phthiraptera: Anoplura)	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution							Cospeciation between hosts and parasites offers a unique opportunity to use information from parasites to infer events in host evolutionary history. Although lice (Insecta: Phthiraptera) are known to cospeciate with their hosts and have frequently served as important markers to infer host evolutionary history, most molecular studies are based on only one or two markers. Resulting phylogenies may therefore represent gene, rather than species, histories and analyses of multiple molecular markers are needed to increase confidence in the results of phylogenetic analyses. Herein, we phylogenetically examine nine molecular markers in primate sucking lice (Phthiraptera: Anoplura) and we use these markers to estimate divergence times among louse lineages. Individual and combined analyses of these nine markers are, for the most part, congruent, supporting relationships hypothesized in previous studies. Only one marker, the nuclear protein-coding gene Histone 3, has a significantly different topology compared to the other markers, and we recommend cautious use of this gene in future studies. Additionally, we find that simultaneous use of multiple markers and calibration points provides the most reliable estimates of louse divergence times, in agreement with previous studies estimating species divergences. Estimates of phylogenies and divergence times also allow us to verify the results of Reed et al. (2007); there was contact between gorilla and humans roughly 3 Ma resulting in a host switch of Pthirus lice from gorillas to humans. Thus, these results provide further evidence that cospeciating organisms can yield important information about the evolutionary history of their hosts.
S2030	J. E. Light;M. A. Toups;D. L. Reed	2008	What's in a name: the taxonomic status of human head and body lice	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution							Human head lice (Anoplura: Pediculidae: Pediculus) are pandemic, parasitizing countless school children worldwide due to the evolution of insecticide resistance, and human body (clothing) lice are responsible for the deaths of millions as a result of vectoring several deadly bacterial pathogens. Despite the obvious impact these lice have had on their human hosts, it is unclear whether head and body lice represent two morphological forms of a single species or two distinct species. To assess the taxonomic status of head and body lice, we provide a synthesis of publicly available molecular data in Genbank, and we compare phylogenetic and population genetic methods using the most diverse geographic and molecular sampling presently available. Our analyses find reticulated networks, gene flow, and a lack of reciprocal monophyly, all of which indicate that head and body lice do not represent genetically distinct evolutionary units. Based on these findings, as well as inconsistencies of morphological, behavioral, and ecological variability between head and body lice, we contend that no known species concept would recognize these louse morphotypes as separate species. We recommend recognizing head and body lice as morphotypes of a single species, P. humanus, until compelling new data and analyses (preferably analyses of fast evolving nuclear markers in a coalescent framework) indicate otherwise.
S2195	S. E. Masta;S. J. Longhorn;J. L. Boore	2008	Arachnid relationships based on mitochondrial genomes: asymmetric nucleotide and amino acid bias affects phylogenetic analyses	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution							Phylogenetic analyses based on mitochondrial DNA have yielded widely differing relationships among members of the arthropod lineage Arachnida, depending on the nucleotide coding schemes and models of evolution used. We enhanced taxonomic coverage within the Arachnida greatly by sequencing seven new arachnid mitochondrial genomes from five orders. We then used all 13 mitochondrial protein-coding genes from these genomes to evaluate patterns of nucleotide and amino acid biases. Our data show that two of the six orders of arachnids (spiders and scorpions) have experienced shifts in both nucleotide and amino acid usage in all their protein-coding genes, and that these biases mislead phylogeny reconstruction. These biases are most striking for the hydrophobic amino acids isoleucine and valine, which appear to have evolved asymmetrical exchanges in response to shifts in nucleotide composition. To improve phylogenetic accuracy based on amino acid differences, we tested two recoding methods: (1) removing all isoleucine and valine sites and (2) recoding amino acids based on their physiochemical properties. We find that these methods yield phylogenetic trees that are consistent in their support of ancient intraordinal divergences within the major arachnid lineages. Further refinement of amino acid recoding methods may help us better delineate interordinal relationships among these diverse organisms.
S2102	R. J. McKenzie;N. P. Barker	2008	Radiation of southern African daisies: biogeographic inferences for subtribe Arctotidinae (Asteraceae, Arctotideae)	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution							The majority of the approximately 80ˆ90 species in subtribe Arctotidinae occur in southern Africa with the center of diversity in the winter-rainfall region. Three species are restricted to afromontane eastern Africa and three species are endemic to Australia. To investigate biogeographic and phylogenetic relationships within Arctotidinae, sequence data from four cpDNA regions (psbA-trnH, trnT-trnL and trnL-trnF spacers and trnL intron) and the ITS nrDNA region for 60 Arctotidinae species were analyzed with parsimony and Bayesian-inference approaches. Eight well-supported major clades were resolved. The earliest-diverging extant lineages are afromontane or inhabit mesic habitats, whereas almost all sampled taxa from the winter-rainfall and semi-arid areas have diverged more recently. Molecular dating estimated that the major clades diverged during the Miocene and Pliocene, which is coincident with the trend of increasing rainfall seasonality, aridification and vegetation changes in southwestern Africa. Trans-oceanic dispersal to Australia was estimated to have occurred during the Pliocene.
S1954	H. M. Meudt;M. J. Bayly	2008	Phylogeographic patterns in the Australasian genus Chionohebe (Veronica s.l., Plantaginaceae) based on AFLP and chloroplast DNA sequences	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution							The alpine genus Chionohebe is one of seven genera in the southern hemisphere Hebe complex. The main aims of this study were to infer the evolutionary relationships and assess phylogeographic patterns among the six species of Chionohebe, determine the origin of the two species with trans-Tasman distributions, and test species delimitations and specimen identifications based on morphology. Analyses of AFLP data recovered five major lineages within Chionohebe, some of which corresponded to species and varieties as currently circumscribed. Although the cushion chionohebes were strongly supported as monophyletic, the sole non-cushion species, C. densifolia, was sister to Parahebe trifida, and thus the AFLP data do not support a monophyletic Chionohebe as usually circumscribed. Strong north/south and west/east phylogeographic patterns were found among and within the main AFLP lineages in New Zealand. Analyses of chloroplast DNA (cpDNA) revealed eight haplotypes in Chionohebe, but these did not correspond to current taxonomy or geography due to widespread interspecific haplotype sharing. Based on both AFLP and cpDNA results, the two trans-Tasman species are shown to have originated in New Zealand and dispersed to Australia independently.
S2098	K. J. Osborn;G. W. Rouse	2008	Multiple origins of pelagicism within Flabelligeridae (Annelida)	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution							The phylogenetic position of Flota, currently within Flotidae, is of interest because it, along with Poeobius meseres, is one of only a few non-phyllodocid, pelagic annelids. Poeobius meseres was recently shown to be part of Flabelligeridae and flotids have also been allied to Flabelligeridae. Our results show that Flota is nested among flabelligerids based on partial sequences of five genes, thus making Flotidae a junior synonym of Flabelligeridae. Relationships within Flabelligeridae show that Poeobius and Flota are not sister groups. They are only distantly related within the family and so pelagicism has arisen twice within Flabelligeridae.
S2100	E. Pfeiler;T. A. Markow	2008	Phylogenetic relationships of leopard frogs (Rana pipiens complex) from an isolated coastal mountain range in southern Sonora, Mexico	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution							Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) sequence data from the control region and 12S rRNA in a sample of leopard frogs from the Sierra El Aguaje in southern Sonora, Mexico, together with available sequences from leopard frogs deposited in GenBank, were used to infer taxonomic identity and provide phylogenetic hypotheses for relationships with other selected members of the Rana pipiens complex. The results suggest that frogs from the Sierra El Aquaje (Rana sp. Aguaje) belong to the R. berlandieri subgroup, or Scurrilirana clade, of the R. pipiens group, and are most closely related to a lineage of leopards frogs from Nayarit, Mexico identified as R. magnaocularis. We also have provided further evidence that R. magnaocularis and R. yavapaiensis are close relatives, as previously suggested from both morphological, allozyme and mtDNA analyses.
S2014	H. Schaefer;S. S. Renner	2008	A phylogeny of the oil bee tribe Ctenoplectrini (Hymenoptera: Anthophila) based on mitochondrial and nuclear data: Evidence for Early Eocene divergence and repeated out-of-Africa dispersal	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution							The bee tribe Ctenoplectrini, with two genera, comprises nine species in tropical Africa and ten in Asia and Australia. Most of them collect floral oil, pollen, and nectar from Cucurbitaceae, but three species are thought to be cleptoparasites. The unusual morphology of Ctenoplectrini has made it difficult to infer their closest relatives, in turn preventing an understanding of these bees‚ geographic and temporal origin. We used two mitochondrial and two nuclear markers (4741 nucleotides) generated for most of the species to test the monophyly of the tribe, its relationships to other Apidae, and its biogeographic history. Ctenoplectrini are strongly supported as monophyletic and closest to the Long-horned bees, Eucerini. The presumably cleptoparasitic species form a clade (Ctenoplectrina) that is sister to the remaining species (Ctenoplectra), confirming the independent evolution of cleptoparasitism in this tribe. Tree topology and molecular dating together suggest that Ctenoplectrini originated in Africa in the Early Eocene and that Ctenoplectra dispersed twice from Africa to Asia, sometime in the Late Eocene, 30-40 my ago, from where one species reached the Australian continent via Indonesia and New Guinea in the mid-Miocene, c. 13 my ago. Dry and cool mid-Miocene climates also coincide with the divergence between C. bequaerti from West Africa and C. terminalis from East and South Africa, perhaps related to fragmentation of the equatorial African rainforest belt.
S2182	J. A. Schulte Ii;E. M. Cartwright	2008	Phylogenetic relationships among iguanian lizards using alternative paritioning methods and TSHZ1: A new phylogenetic marker for reptiles	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution							none
S2042	D. S. Sikes;S. M. Vamosi;S. T. Trumbo;M. Ricketts;C. Venables	2008	Molecular Systematics and Biogeography of Nicrophorus in part ÀÜ the investigator species group (Coleoptera: Silphidae) Using Mixture Model MCMC	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution							Burying beetles (Silphidae: Nicrophorus) are well-known for their biparental care and monopolization of small vertebrate carcasses in subterranean crypts. They have been the focus of intense behavioral ecological research since the 1980s yet no thorough phylogenetic estimate for the group exists. The relationships among the species, and the validity of some species, are poorly understood. Here, we infer the relationships and examine species boundaries among 50 individuals representing 15 species, primarily of the investigator species group, using a mixture-model Bayesian analysis. Two mitochondrial genes, COI and COII, were used, providing 2,129 aligned nucleotides (567 parsimony-informative). The Akaike Information Criterion and Bayes Factors were used to select the best fitting model, in addition to Reversible Jump MCMC, which accommodated model uncertainty. A 21 parameter, three partition GTR+G was the final model chosen. Despite a presumed Old World origin for the genus itself, the basal lineages and immediate outgroups of the investigator species group are New World species. Bayesian methods reconstruct the common ancestor of the investigator species group as New World and imply one later transition to the Old World with two return transitions to the New World. Prior hypotheses concerning the questionable validity of four species names, N. praedator, N. confusus, N. encaustus and N. mexicanus were tested. No evidence was found for the validity of the N. investigator synonym N. praedator. We found evidence rejecting the species status of N. confusus (NEW SYNONYM of N. sepultor). Weak evidence was found for the species status of N. encaustus and N. mexicanus, which are tentatively retained as valid. Our results strongly reject a recently published hypothesis that N. interruptus (NEW STATUS as valid species) is a subspecies of N. investigator.
S2045	T. H. Struck;M. P. Nesnidal;G. Purschke;K. M. Halanych	2008	Detecting Possibly Saturated Positions in 18S and 28S Sequences and their Influence on Phylogenetic Reconstruction of Annelida (Lophotrochozoa)	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution							Phylogenetic reconstructions may be hampered by multiple substitutions in nucleotide positions obliterating signal, a phenomenon called saturation. Traditionally, plotting ti/tv ratios against genetic distances has been used to reveal saturation by assessing when ti/tv stabilizes at 1. However, interpretation of results and assessment of comparability between different data sets or partitions are rather subjective. Herein, we present the new C factor, which quantifies convergence of ti/tv ratios, thus allowing comparability. Furthermore, we introduce a comparative value for homoplasy, the O/E ratio, based on alterations of tree length. Simulation studies and an empirical example, based on annelid rRNA-gene sequences, show that the C factor correlates with noise, tree length and genetic distance and therefore is a proxy for saturation. The O/E ratio correlates with the C factor, which does not provide an intrinsic threshold of exclusion, and thus both together can objectively guide decisions to exclude saturated nucleotide positions. However, analyses also showed that, for reconstructing annelid phylogeny using Maximum Likelihood, an increase in numbers of positions improves tree reconstruction more than does the exclusion of saturated positions. Additional remarks: For the ALL analyses we used the Included28S and Included18S character sets in PAUP (see below) and for the EX analyses the following partitions were also excluded: 50_60_28S, 60_70_28S, 70_80_28S, 80_100_28S, 60_70_18S, 70_80_18S. Character sets were as follows: BEGIN SETS; CHARSET Included28S = 151-160 167-189 193-220 224-261 264-287 303-315 319-345 347-381 383-409 426-440 643-653 657-677 817-826 950-961 1092-1130 1145-1169 1176-1186 1193-1213 1267-1277 1418-1430 1491-1544 1546-1585 1588-1698 1720-1757 1766-1778 1780-1815 1847-1858 1886-1938 1943-1962 1978-2044 2055-2065 2067-2101 2103-2144 2206-2227 2230-2239 2247-2260 2263-2287 2289-2332 2340-2357 2359-2412 2423-2434 2553-2600 2672-2686 2688-2704 2706-2742 2761-2777 2779-2800 2827-2839 2841-2854 2864-2878 2880-2889 2891-2903 2906-2959 2973-3046 3048-3057 3147-3158 3468-3479 3699-3734 3742-3794 3805-3883 4546-4583 4585-4627 4629-4663 4695-4732 4742-4756 4758-4777 4830-4880 5162-5198 5209-5228 5249-5277 5279-5344 5481-5520 5522-5597 5602-5700 5729-5771; CHARSET Included18S = 5776-5793 5799-5811 5823-5832 5880-5896 6025-6034 6037-6052 6057-6076 6079-6103 6105-6114 6116-6134 6136-6178 6180-6202 6204-6231 6233-6275 6283-6309 6317-6396 6399-6434 7209-7245 7267-7298 7334-7359 7361-7370 7386-7408 7410-7454 7466-7528 7537-7547 7558-7569 7572-7583 7586-7596 7599-7620 7630-7648 7650-7702 7713-7725 7737-7797 7799-7811 7832-7853 7856-7868 8019-8045 8053-8099 8108-8136 8145-8161 8175-8213 8216-8340; CHARSET 0_10_28S = 374-379 1118-1128 1524-1527 1593-1608 1630-1648 1657-1661 1682-1687 1787 1788 1906-1912 1924-1935 2095-2101 2103 2310-2320 2360-2366 2930-2941 2986-2991 3751-3769 3817-3827 3833-3841 3867-3883 4558-4573 4587-4604 4616-4622 4639-4642 4655-4659 4702-4714 4841-4844 5185-5198 5500-5520 5522-5587 5602-5613 5625-5633 5645-5687 5754-5765; CHARSET 10_20_28S = 236-242 269-271 286 287 309 310 332-343 356-366 369-373 380 381 1115-1117 1129 1130 1520-1523 1528-1534 1590-1592 1609 1610 1627-1629 1649-1656 1662-1665 1671-1681 1688-1690 1732-1745 1780-1786 1789-1804 1904 1905 1913-1923 1936 1937 1978-1980 2057-2065 2067-2073 2093 2094 2104-2109 2299-2309 2321-2332 2340-2346 2356 2357 2359 2367-2380 2923-2929 2942-2944 2980-2985 2992-2994 3728-3730 3749 3750 3770-3774 3813-3816 3828-3832 3842-3851 3864-3866 4546 4547 4555-4557 4574-4583 4585 4586 4605-4615 4623-4627 4629-4638 4643-4647 4651-4654 4660-4662 4699-4701 4715-4718 4765-4773 4839 4840 4845 4846 5181-5184 5211-5227 5290 5294-5301 5334-5338 5496-5499 5588-5597 5614-5624 5634-5644 5688-5690 5749-5753 5766-5771; CHARSET 20_30_28S = 177-183 233-235 243-261 264-268 272-285 305-308 311-315 319-331 344 345 347-355 367 368 383 1112-1114 1277 1518 1519 1535-1544 1564-1579 1588 1589 1611 1612 1625 1626 1666-1670 1691 1692 1728-1731 1746-1749 1778 1805 1806 1891-1903 193 1949-1954 1981-1984 1999 2000 2018-2042 2055 2056 2074-2080 2090-2092 2110-2112 2239 2283 2297 2298 2347-2355 2381-2384 2391-2403 2558-2561 2729-2741 2827 2917-2922 2945-2951 2973-2979 2995 2996 3004-3014 3023-3029 3725-3727 3731-3734 3746-3748 3775-3777 3809-3812 3852-3855 3859-3863 4548-4554 4648-4650 4663 4696-4698 4719-4722 4762-4764 4774-4777 4838 4847 4848 5177-5180 5209 5210 5228 5249-5255 5271-5277 5279-5289 5291-5293 5302-5333 5339-5341 5493-5495 5691 5692 5729-5731 5740-5748; CHARSET 30_40_28S = 174-176 184-186 231 232 303 304 384 394-398 1111 1145-1147 1186 1193 1276 1516 1517 1546-1563 1580-1585 1613 1614 1623 1624 1693 1694 1725-1727 1750-1753 1776 1777 1807 1847 1848 1888-1890 1946-1948 1955 1956 1985-1988 1993-1998 2001-2006 2015-2017 2043 2044 2081-2089 2113 2114 2238 2247 2248 2280-2282 2284-2287 2294-2296 2385-2390 2404-2407 2555-2557 2562-2577 2680-2685 2724-2728 2742 2770-2772 2828-2832 2837-2839 2841 2842 2915 2916 2952-2956 2997-3003 3015-3022 3030-3033 3048-3051 3721-3724 3742-3745 3778 3779 3805-3808 3856-3858 4695 4723-4728 4759-4761 4836 4837 4849 4850 5173-5176 5256-5270 5342 5343 5490-5492 5693 5694 5732-5739; CHARSET 40_50_28S = 156 172 173 187-189 230 385 386 391-393 399 400 676 677 1109 1110 1148-1160 1184 1185 1194-1197 1274 1275 1426-1430 1491 1503 1504 1514 1515 1615-1622 1695 1722-1724 1754-1757 1774 1775 1808 1809 1849 1886 1887 1943-1945 1957 1989-1992 2007-2014 2115-2118 2125-2131 2206 2207 2218-2226 2236 2237 2249 2250 2278 2279 2289-2293 2408-2410 2553 2554 2578-2582 2679 2686 2721-2723 2767-2769 2773-2776 2785-2791 2833-2836 2843-2846 2869-2876 2914 2957-2959 3034-3039 3044-3046 3052 3053 3147 3148 3716-3720 3780 3781 4729-4732 4742 4743 4758 4835 4851-4853 4862-4870 5171 5172 5344 5481-5489 5695 5696; CHARSET 50_60_28S = 151-155 157-160 170 171 228 229 387-390 401 672-675 1108 1161-1169 1176-1183 1198-1205 1272 1273 1423-1425 1492-1502 1505-1513 1696-1698 1720 1721 1766 1771-1773 1810 1811 1850-1852 1958 1959 2119-2124 2132 2133 2208 2209 2215-2217 2227 2230 2231-2235 2251-2255 2267-2269 2275-2277 2411 2412 2423-2426 2583 2584 2677 2678 2688 2701-2704 2706 2719 2720 2761 2764 2765 2766 2777 2779-2784 2792 2793 2847-2849 2866-2868 2877 2878 2902 2903 2910-2913 3040-3043 3054 3055 3149 3479 3714 3715 3782 4744-4747 4753-4756 4834 4854-4861 4871-4875 5162-5170 5697 5698; CHARSET 60_70_28S = 167-169 226 227 402 403 434-439 643-648 670 671 950 1106 1107 1206-1208 1270 1271 1421 1422 1767-1770 1812-1815 1853-1858 1960 1961 2134-2136 2210-2214 2256-2260 2263-2266 2270-2274 2427 2428 2585-2587 2672-2676 2689 2699 2700 2707-2710 2715-2718 2762 2763 2794 2850-2854 2864 2865 2880-2882 2899-2901 2906-2909 3056 3057 3150 3151 3157 3158 3476-3478 3711-3713 3783-3785 3794 4748-4752 4833 4876-4880 5699 5700; CHARSET 70_80_28S = 193 194 224 225 404-409 431-433 440 649-653 657 666-669 817 951-953 1104 1105 1209 1210 1269 1420 1962 2137-2144 2429 2430 2588-2597 2600 2690-2692 2696-2698 2711-2714 2795 2796 2883-2887 2895-2898 3152-3156 3468-3475 3699 3700 3707-3710 3786-3788 3791-3793 4831 4832; CHARSET 80_100_28S = 195-220 426-430 658-665 818-826 954-961 1092-1103 1211-1213 1267 1268 1418 1419 2431-2434 2598 2599 2693-2695 2797-2800 2888 2889 2891-2894 3701-3706 3789 3790 4830; CHARSET 0_10_18S = 5799-5810 6205-6215 6250-6254 6345-6359 6371-6383 6419-6422 7392-7398 7490-7501 7647 7650 7651-7680 7687-7702 7747-7749 7780-7797 7799-7811 7832-7836 7838-7852 8025 8026 8069-8087 8108-8115 8233-8239 8276-8308; CHARSET 10_20_18S = 5785-5793 5811 6141-6178 6180 6186-6194 6201 6202 6204 6216-6219 6224-6231 6247-6249 6255-6257 6300-6306 6340-6344 6360-6370 6384-6396 6399-6418 6423-6426 7278-7281 7390 7391 7399-7401 7466-7469 7487-7489 7502-7514 7613-7620 7630-7632 7641-7646 7648 7681-7686 7743-7746 7750-7752 7760-7779 7837 7853 8023 8024 8027-8029 8065-8068 8088-8093 8116-8118 8230-8232 8240-8242 8272-8275 8309 8310; CHARSET 20_30_18S = 5782-5784 6025 6026 6087-6095 6138-6140 6181-6185 6195-6200 6220-6223 6233 6246 6258-6261 6297-6299 6307-6309 6317 6335-6339 6427-6429 7214-7241 7275-7277 7282-7287 7342-7346 388 7389 7402 7403 7429-7436 7452-7454 7470-7476 7484-7486 7515-7527 7592-7594 7611 7612 7633-7640 7713 7737-7742 7753-7759 7856-7867 8021 8022 8030 8031 8062-8064 8094-8099 8119 8120 8190-8195 8226-8229 8243-8246 8266-8271 8311 8312; CHARSET 30_40_18S = 5781 5892-5896 6027 6028 6082-6086 6096-6098 6136 6137 6234 6235 6243-6245 6262-6266 6294-6296 6318-6320 6331-6334 6430 6431 7212 7213 7242-7244 7273 7274 7288-7290 7339-7341 7347-7356 7386 7387 7404-7406 7428 7437-7439 7448-7451 7477-7483 7528 7589-7591 7595 7596 7608-7610 7714-7725 7868 8020 8032 8059-8061 8121 8187-8189 8196-8201 8223-8225 8247-8254 8261-8265 8313 8314; CHARSET 40_50_18S = 5779 5780 5880 5890 5891 6029 6042-6046 6076 6079 6080 6081 6099-6102 6134 6236-6242 6267 6268 6287-6293 6321-6324 6329 6330 6432-6434 7211 7245 7272 7291-7295 7334-7338 7357-7359 7361-7370 7407 7408 7426 7427 7440-7447 7587 7588 7599-7607 8019 8033 8034 8053-8058 8122 8123 8185 8186 8202-8213 8216-8222 8255-8260 8315; CHARSET 50_60_18S = 5778 5832 5881-5883 5886-5889 6030 6040 6041 6047-6051 6061-6075 6103 6105 6132 6133 6269-6272 6283-6286 6325-6328 7210 7269-7271 7296-7298 7410-7425 7565-7569 7586 8035 8036 8045 8124-8129 8161 8175-8184 8316 8317; CHARSET 60_70_18S = 5777 5830 5831 5884 5885 6031-6033 6037-6039 6052 6057-6060 6106-6109 6119-6131 6273-6275 7209 7267 7268 7537 7538 7547 7562-7564 7572 7573 7582 7583 8037-8044 8130-8134 8158-8160 8318-8333 8335-8340; CHARSET 70_80_18S = 5776 5823-5829 6034 6110-6114 6116-6118 7539-7546 7558-7561 7574-7581 8135 8136 8145-8157 8334; CHARSET 28S=1-5775; CHARSET 18S=5776-8340; END;
S2049	G. H. Sung;G. O. P. Jr;J. W. Spatafora	2008	The oldest fossil evidence of animal parasitism by fungi supports a Cretaceous radiation of fungal-arthropod symbioses	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution							Paleohymenostilbe coccophagus, a fungal parasite of a scale insect from the Early Cretaceous (Upper Albian: 97-105 Mya), is reported and described here. This fossil not only provides the oldest fossil evidence of animal parasitism by fungi but also contains morphological features similar to species of the extant asexual genus Hymenostilbe (Family Ophiocordycipitaceae, Order Hypocreales, Kingdom Fungi). Because species of Hypocreales collectively exhibit a broad range of nutritional modes and symbioses involving plants, animals and other fungi, we conducted ancestral host reconstruction coupled with phylogenetic dating analyses calibrated with P. coccophagus. These results support a plant-based ancestral nutritional mode for Hypocreales, which then diversified ecologically through a dynamic process of intra- and interkingdom host shifts involving fungal, higher plant and animal hosts. This is especially evident in the families Cordycipitaceae, Clavicipitaceae and Ophiocordycipitaceae, which are characterized by a high occurrence of insect pathogens. The ancestral ecologies of Clavicipitaceae and Ophiocordycipitaceae are inferred to be animal pathogens, a trait inherited from a common ancestor, whereas the ancestral host affiliation of Cordycipitaceae was resolved as either animal or fungi. Phylogenetic dating supports both a Jurassic origin of fungal-animal symbioses within Hypocreales and diversification of all three insect pathogenic families during the Cretaceous, concurrent with the diversification of insects and angiosperms.
S2147	N. P. Tippery;D. H. Les	2008	Phylogenetic analysis of the internal transcribed spacer (ITS) region in Menyanthaceae using predicted secondary structure	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution							Sequences of the nuclear internal transcribed spacer (ITS) regions ITS1 and ITS2 have been used widely in molecular phylogenetic studies because of their relatively high variability and facility of amplification. For phylogenetic applications, most researchers use sequence alignments that are based on nucleotide similarity. However, confidence in the alignment often deteriorates at taxonomic levels above genus, due to increasing variability among sequences. Like ribosomal RNA (rRNA) and other RNA molecules, the ITS transcripts consist in part of conserved secondary structures ("stems" and "loops") that can be predicted by mathematical algorithm. Researchers have long considered the evolutionary conservation of rRNA secondary structure, but until recently few phylogenetic analyses of the ITS regions specifically incorporated structural data. We outline a novel method by which to derive additional phylogenetic data from ITS secondary structure in order to evaluate support for relationships at higher taxonomic levels. To illustrate the method, we describe an example from the plant family Menyanthaceae. Using predicted ITS secondary structure data, we obtained a well-resolved and moderately supported phylogeny, in which most topological relationships were congruent with the tree constructed using ITS nucleotide sequence data. Furthermore, the explicit encoding of ITS structural data in a phylogenetic framework allowed for the reconstruction of putative ancestral states and structural evolution in the functional but highly variable ITS region.
S1995	I. J. Wang;A. J. Crawford;E. J. Bermingham	2008	Phylogeography of the Pygmy Rain Frog (Pristimantis ridens) across the lowland wet forests of Isthmian Central America	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution							We used a phylogeographic approach to elucidate the evolutionary history of a lineage of frogs, known as Pristimantis (formerly Eleutherodactylus) ridens (Anura: Brachycephalidae), restricted to the wet forests occurring along the Caribbean versant of Isthmian Central America as well as the disjunct wet forest on the Pacific slope of Costa Rica. We placed our phylogeographic study of P. ridens within a larger molecular phylogenetic analysis of Central American Pristimantis. All phylogenetic inferences were based on a 1,455 base pair fragment of mitochondrial DNA, containing the complete ND2 gene and five flanking tRNA genes. Our reconstruction of the intraspecific phylogeny of P. ridens yielded a basal trichotomy dating to an estimated 12+ million years ago (Ma), consisting of central Panama, western Panama, and Costa Rica plus Honduras. Thus, the presence of P. ridens appears to pre-date the completion of the Isthmus 3.1 Ma. Using a parametric bootstrap (SOWH) test, we evaluated four a priori zoogeographic hypotheses for the origin and spread of P. ridens. This analysis suggested that the P. ridens populations on the Caribbean versant of Costa Rica were established by Pacific versant ancestors only recently, in contrast to the very old lineages found in Panama. Our results support a model of Miocene colonization, long-term geographic stasis, followed by rapid dispersal across the Caribbean lowlands during the Pliocene or Pleistocene.
S2088	R. J. Waterman;A. Pauw;T. G. Barraclough;V. Savolainen	2008	Pollinators underestimated: a molecular phylogeny reveals widespread floral convergence in oil-secreting orchids (sub-tribe Coryciinae) of the Cape of South Africa	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution							The oil-secreting orchids of southern Africa belong to the sub-tribe Coryciinae within Diseae. A phylogeny of Diseae is inferred using sequence data from all genera in the tribe, with an emphasis on resolving generic classifications within Coryciinae. Nuclear (ITS) and plastid (trnLF and matK) gene region sequences were analysed for 79 ingroup taxa and 3 outgroup taxa. Coryciinae is confirmed to be diphyletic, with Disperis and Coryciinae sensu strico (s.s.) forming separate monophyletic clades. The current genera Corycium and Pterygodium are not monophyletic according to our analysis and we propose a subdivision of Coryciinae s.s. into 10 monophyletic clades including 3 monotypic groups. Previous generic classifications of Coryciinae s.s. have been hampered by convergent evolution of floral parts, a consequence of few pollinator species and limited pollinia attachment sites in the oil-bee pollination system.
S1963	R. C. Winkworth;C. D. Bell;M. J. Donoghue	2008	Mitochondrial sequences and Dipsacales phylogeny: mixed models, partitioned Bayesian analyses, and model selection	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution							Phylogenetic analyses of chloroplast DNA sequences, morphology, and combined data have provided consistent support for many of the major branches within the angiosperm clade Dispacales. Here we use sequences from three mitochondrial loci to test the existing broad scale phylogeny and in an attempt to resolve several relationships that have remained uncertain. Parsimony, maximum likelihood, and Bayesian analyses of a combined mitochondrial data set recover trees broadly consistent with previous studies, although resolution and support are lower than in the largest chloroplast analyses. Combining chloroplast and mitochondrial data results in a generally well-resolved and very strongly supported topology but the previously recognized problem areas remain. To investigate why these relationships have been difficult to resolve we conducted a series of experiments using different data partitions and heterogeneous substitution models. Usually more complex modeling schemes are favored regardless of the partitions recognized but model choice had little effect on topology or support values. In contrast there are consistent but weakly supported differences in the topologies recovered from coding and non-coding matrices. These conflicts directly correspond to relationships that were poorly resolved in analyses of the full combined chloroplast-mitochondrial data set. We suggest incongruent signal has contributed to our inability to confidently resolve these problem areas.
S2068	B. Zeng;L. Xu;B. Yue;Z. Li;F. Zou	2008	Molecular Phylogeography and Genetic Differentiation of Blue Sheep Pseudois nayaur szechuanensis and Pseudois schaeferi in China	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution							Within the genus Pseudois (Bovidae, Artiodactyla), two challenges are faced by taxonomists. First, the designation of the two subspecies of blue sheep, Pseudois nayaur nayaur and Pseudois nayaur szechuanensis, tends to be questionable with the accumulation of morphological and molecular data. Second, the taxonomic status of the dwarf blue sheep (Pseudois schaeferi) has been controversial since its discovery, and molecular analyses with relatively small sample sizes have not painted a clear picture. We collected samples and DNA sequence data from a broad geographic range in China to investigate the population structure of Pseudois nayaur szechuanensis and its phylogenetic relationship with Pseudois schaeferi. Employing mitochondrial cytochrome b and control region sequences, as well as the nuclear gene zona pellucida glycoprotein 3, further investigation was performed to extend upon previous studies. We found that the population of Helan Mountain of Ningxia Hui Autonomous Region has significantly differentiated from the populations in Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan provinces, and may be classified as a new subspecies according to the 75% rule. The dwarf blue sheep was found to be some individuals of Pseudois nayaur szechuanensis with morphological variations and is not a species or subspecies, since they did not fall into a monophyletic group in the phylogenetic analyses with blue sheep. Gene flow between dwarf blue sheep and common blue sheep might have occurred in different areas of western Sichuan, which would result in the paraphyly of dwarf blue sheep.
S2246	M. Dohrmann;A. G. Collins;G. Woerheide	2009	Phylogeny of glass sponges (Porifera, Hexactinellida): monophyly of Lyssacinosida and position of additional taxa	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution							No abstract.
S2261	S. Joly;P. B. Heenan;P. J. Lockhart	2009	A Pleistocene inter-tribal allopolyploidization event precedes the species radiation of Pachycladon (Brassicaceae) in New Zealand	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution							The Southern Alps in New Zealand contain many herbaceous plant groups that have radiated during the Plicoene-Pleistocene. The species in these genera tend to be polyploid relative to their overseas close relatives, an observation of much interest given that hybridization and allopolyploidy have recently been suggested as a possible stimulus for adaptive radiation. We were interested to determine whether or not allopollyploidy was a feature of Pachycladon, a genus which is hypothesised to have adaptively diversified onto different geological substrates in the mountains of the South Island of New Zealand. Phylogenetic analyses of five single-copy nuclear genes show that Pachycladon species have two copies of each gene representing two highly diverged evolutionary lineages from the Brassicaceae. Molecular clock analyses of all loci suggest that the two genome copies in Pachycladon diverged 8 million years ago, and that the allopolyploid origin of the genus occurred during the Pleistocene between 1.6 and 0.8 million years ago. Thus, the hybridization event at the origin of the Pachycladon radiation is perhaps the most extreme example yet reported of successful hybridization between distantly related parents.
S2258	E. V. M;M. D. Meyer;I. M. White;T. Backeljau	2009	African Dacus (Diptera: Tephritidae): Molecular data and host plant associations do not corroborate morphology-based classifications	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution							The genus Dacus Fabricius includes economically important pest fruit flies distributed in the Afrotropical and Indo-Australian regions. Two recent revisions based on morphological characters proposed new and partially discordant classifications synonymyzing / revalidating several subgeneric names and forming species groups. Regardless these efforts, an exhaustive description of phylogenetic relationships among Dacus species could not be possible mainly due to homoplasy and possible convergence in morphological characters. We investigated the molecular phylogeny of African Dacus by sequencing seventy-one representatives of thirty-two species at two mitochondrial (COI, 16S) and a nuclear (period) gene fragments. Phylogenetic relationships were inferred through Bayesian and Maximum Parsimony methods and hypotheses about the monophyly of Dacus subgenera were tested by Shimodaira-Hasegawa tests. Analyses of the single gene fragments reveal that the nuclear gene supports similar conclusions as the two mitochondrial genes. The analyses of the concatenated dataset resolved two major supported groups as well as a number of supported clades and subclades often consisting of different representatives of the currently recognised subgenera. Additionally, specimens of D. humeralis from Eastern and Western African locations formed separate clusters, suggesting cryptic speciation within this taxon. The comparisons between the molecular phylogeny and the morphological classification revealed a number of discrepancies. In the vast majority of cases, the molecular data were not compatible with the monophyly of the currently recognised subgenera. Conversely, the results suggest that Apocynaceae feeders are a monophyletic sister group of species feeding on both Cucurbitaceae and Passifloraceae (Cucurbitaceae feeders being a paraphyletic group). The molecular phylogeny, puts questions regarding the taxonomic position and separation of a number of Dacus species and suggests that host plant choice could could provide substantial support to, and a basis for, a more congruent classification of African Dacus.
S2241	H. Verbruggen;M. Ashworth;S. T. LoDuca;C. Vlaeminck;E. Cocquyt;T. Sauvage;F. W. Zechman;D. S. Littler;M. M. Littler;F. Leliaert;O. D. Clerck	2009	A multi-locus time-calibrated phylogeny of the siphonous green algae	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution	50	3	642-653	10.1016/j.ympev.2008.12.018			The siphonous green algae are an assemblage of seaweeds that consist of a single giant cell. They comprise two sister orders, the Bryopsidales and Dasycladales. We infer the phylogenetic relationships among the siphonous green algae based on a multi-locus data matrix and analyze temporal aspects of their diversification using relaxed molecular clock methods calibrated with the fossil record. The multi-locus approach resolves much of the previous phylogenetic uncertainty, but the radiation of families belonging to the core Halimedineae remains unresolved. In the Bryopsidales, three main clades were inferred, two of which correspond to previously described suborders (Bryopsidineae and Halimedineae) and a third lineage that contains only the limestone-boring genus Ostreobium. Relaxed molecular clock models indicate a Neoproterozoic origin of the siphonous green algae and a Paleozoic radiation of the orders into their families. The inferred node ages are used to resolve conflicting hypotheses about species ages in the tropical marine alga Halimeda. Interpretation of fossils as extant species should follow only from statistically sound morphometric analyses, using time-series in various parts of the world.
S2281	P. Zhang;T. J. Papenfuss;M. H. Wake;L. Qu;D. Wake	2009	Phylogeny and biogeography of the family Salamandridae (Amphibia: Caudata) inferred from complete mitochondrial genomes	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution	49		586-597	10.1016/j.ympev.2008.08.020			Phylogenetic relationships of members of the salamander family Salamandridae were examined using complete mitochondrial genomes collected from 42 species representing all 20 salamandrid genera and &#64257;ve outgroup taxa. Weighted maximum parsimony, partitioned maximum likelihood, and partitioned Bayesian approaches all produce an identical, well-resolved phylogeny; most branches are strongly supported with greater than 90% bootstrap values and 1.0 Bayesian posterior probabilities. Our results support recent taxonomic changes in &#64257;nding the traditional genera Mertensiella, Euproctus, and Triturus to be non-monophyletic species assemblages. We successfully resolved the current polytomy at the base of the salamandrid tree: the Italian newt genus Salamandrina is sister to all remaining salamandrids. Beyond Salamandrina, a clade comprising all remaining newts is separated from a clade containing the true salamanders. Among these newts, the branching orders of well-supported clades are: primitive newts (Echinotriton, Pleurodeles, and Tylototriton), New World newts (Notophthalmus-Taricha), Corsica-Sardinia newts (Euproctus), and modern European newts (Calotriton, Lissotriton, Mesotriton, Neurergus, Ommatotriton, and Triturus) plus modern Asian newts (Cynops, Pachytriton, and Paramesotriton).Two alternative sets of calibration points and two Bayesian dating methods (BEAST and MultiDivTime) were used to estimate timescales for salamandrid evolution. The estimation difference by dating methods is slight and we propose two sets of timescales based on different calibration choices. The two timescales suggest that the initial diversi&#64257;cation of extant salamandrids took place in Europe about 97 or 69 Ma. North American salamandrids were derived from their European ancestors by dispersal through North Atlantic Land Bridges in the Late Cretaceous (69 Ma) or Middle Eocene (43 Ma). Ancestors of Asian salamandrids most probably dispersed to the eastern Asia from Europe, after withdrawal of the Turgai Sea (29 Ma).
S2274	A. Van der Meijden;Y. Chiari;M. Mucedda;S. Carranza;C. Corti;M. Veith	2009	Phylogenetic relationships of Sardinian cave salamanders, genus Hydromantes, based on mitochondrial and nuclear DNA sequence data	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution	51	2	399-404	10.1016/j.ympev.2008.12.011			A phylogeny of the European members of the genus Hydromantes, based on three mitochondrial (12S, 16S, Cytochrome b) and two nuclear genes (Rag-1, BDNF) for 27 populations resolved all eight currently recognized species as monophyletic clades. Relationships among the three main clades, the mainland clade (Hydromantes (Speleomantes) strinatii, H. (S.) ambrosii and H. (S.) italicus), the Eastern Sardinian clade (H. (S.) flavus, H. (S.) supramontis, H. (S.) imperialis and H. (S.) sarrabusensis) and H. (Atylodes) genei from south-west Sardinia, remain poorly resolved. Genetic distances show high levels of differentiation within H. (A.) genei and H. (S.) imperialis.
S2306	M. Gruenstaeudl;E. Urtubey;R. K. Jansen;R. Samuel;M. H. J. Barfuss;T. F. Stuessy	2009	Phylogeny of Barnadesioideae (Asteraceae) inferred from DNA sequence data and morphology	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution	51	3	572-587	10.1016/j.ympev.2009.01.023			Subfamily Barnadesioideae (Asteraceae) consists of nine genera and 91 species endemic to South America. Presumed sister to all other Asteraceae, its intergeneric relationships are key to understanding the early evolution of the family. Results of the only molecular study on the subfamily conflict with relationships inferred from morphology. We investigate inter- and intrageneric relationships in Barnadesioideae with novel DNA sequence data and morphological characters using parsimony, likelihood and Bayesian inference. Competing phylogenetic hypotheses, both previous and present, are evaluated using likelihood-based tests. Evolutionary trends within Barnadesioideae are inferred.
S2322	V. C. Almada;J. I. Robalo;A. Levy;J. Freyhof;G. Bernardi;I. Doadrio	2009	Phylogenetic analysis of Peri-Mediterranean blennies of the genus Salaria: molecular insights on the colonization of freshwaters	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution	52	2	424-431	10.1016/j.ympev.2009.03.029			In this paper, the phylogenetic relationships of the marine blenny Salaria pavo and the freshwater S. fluviatilis and S. economidisi were analysed using 4 molecular markers: the mitochondrial 12S rRNA, 16S rRNA, and the control region and the nuclear first intron of the S7 ribosomal protein. The monophyly of Salaria is supported, as well as that of S. pavo and that of all the freshwater members of Salaria. Thus, the present results support a single origin for all freshwater Mediterranean blenniids. Our results reject the placement of these species in the genus Lipophrys as proposed in previous studies. Using a molecular clock calibrated with trans-Isthmian geminate blenniid species, the split between the ancestor of the freshwater lineage and the ancestor of S. pavo is tentatively placed in the Middle Miocene (well before the Messinian). The marine S. pavo displays a very low level of intraspecific sequence divergence consistent with a Pleistocene bottleneck. S. fluviatilis is a paraphyletic entity with S. economidisi nested within it. A Moroccan population of S. fluviatilis is more divergent than S. economidisi, both in nuclear and mitochondrial genes. Fish from Israel together with some Turkish samples represent the second oldest split. It is argued that these populations may represent true species. Thus, further studies on the taxonomy of these freshwater blennies are urgently needed.
S2337	D. G. Chapple;P. A. Ritchie;C. H. Daugherty	2009	Origin, diversification and systematics of the New Zealand skink fauna (Reptilia: Scincidae)	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution	52	2	470-487	10.1016/j.ympev.2009.03.021			The diverse scincid lizard fauna of the largely submerged subcontinent of Zealandia (which incorporates New Zealand, New Caledonia, Lord Howe Island, Norfolk Island, and the Chatham Islands) forms a monophyletic lineage within the Eugongylus group of skinks. We use 4062 bp of mitochondrial (ND2, ND4, Cytochrome b, 12SrRNA, 16SrRNA) and nuclear (Rag-1) DNA sequence data to recover a molecular phylogeny for the New Zealand skink fauna, and investigate the origin and diversification of skinks in New Zealand. Our phylogeny includes 32 of the 33 extant described New Zealand skink species (Cyclodina and Oligosoma), the Lord Howe Island skink (C. lichenigera), and representatives from several New Caledonian genera. Neighbour-joining, Maximum Parsimony, Maximum Likelihood and Bayesian phylogenetic analyses are used to demonstrate that the New Zealand skink species form a single monophyletic lineage, with C. lichenigera representing a closely related sister lineage to the New Zealand radiation. Our relaxed molecular clock analyses indicate that skinks colonised New Zealand in the early Miocene (16-22.6 mya), shortly after the Oligocene drowning event (~25 mya). We propose that skinks reached New Zealand from New Caledonia via long-distance overwater dispersal, with C. lichenigera persisting on volcanic islands along the Lord Howe Rise and Norfolk Ridge. Eight major genetic clades are evident within the New Zealand skink fauna, with the divergences among these clades during the early to mid-Miocene resulting in distinct open habitat, forest, and coastal radiations. Subsequent diversification in the late Miocene-Pliocene appears to coincide with tectonic activity along the Alpine Fault and the uplift of the Southern Alps. We were unable to resolve the taxonomic affinities of O. suteri, New Zealand s only native oviparous skink. We use the phylogeny and topology tests to resolve several taxonomic issues and assess the taxonomic status of several suspected undescribed taxa. We complete a generic revision for the New Zealand skink fauna, placing C. lichenigera and all native New Zealand species into a single genus.
S2297	A. Willyard;R. Cronn;A. Liston	2009	Reticulate evolution and incomplete lineage sorting among the ponderosa pines	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution	52	2	498-511	10.1016/j.ympev.2009.02.011			Interspecific gene flow via hybridization may play a major role in evolution by creating reticulate rather than hierarchical lineages in plant species. Occasional diploid pine hybrids indicate the potential for introgression, but reticulation is hard to detect because ancestral polymorphism is still shared across many groups of pine species. Nucleotide sequences for 53 accessions from 17 species in subsection Ponderosae (Pinus) provide evidence for reticulate evolution. Two discordant patterns among independent low-copy nuclear gene trees and a chloroplast haplotype are better explained by introgression than incomplete lineage sorting or other causes of incongruence. Conflicting resolution of three monophyletic Pinus coulteri accessions is best explained by ancient introgression followed by a genetic bottleneck. More recent hybridization transferred a chloroplast from P. jeffreyi to a sympatric P. washoensis individual. We conclude that incomplete lineage sorting could account for other examples of non-monophyly, and caution against any analysis based on single-accession or single-locus sampling in Pinus.
S2380	J. M. Padial;S. Castroviejo-Fisher;I. De la Riva	2009	The phylogenetic relationships of Yunganastes revisited (Anura)	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution	52	3	911-915	10.1016/j.ympev.2009.05.006			The phylogenetic relationships of the subgenus Yunganastes (Anura: Terrarana) are contentious. Previous studies placed Yunganastes within the genera Craugastor, Eleutherodactylus or Pristimantis, currently in three different families: Craugastoridae, Eleutherodactylidae, and Strabomantidae. We study the phylogenetic relationships of Yunganastes using Bayesian analyses of 1300 base pairs of the 16S and 12S mtDNA genes. Our dataset includes 375 species representing all major groups of Terrarana. The clade Yunganastes is nested within the family Strabomantidae, but not within any of the described genera. The phylogenetic position of Yunganastes and a morphological synapomorphy are used as criteria to raise the clade to the genus level.
S2278	R. A. Pyron;F. T. Burbrink	2009	Neogene diversification and taxonomic stability in the snake tribe Lampropeltini (Serpentes: Colubridae)	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution	52		524-529	10.1016/j.ympev.2009.02.008			The snake tribe Lampropeltini (the king, milk, pine, rat, short-tailed, long-nosed, scarlet, and glossy snakes) comprises a well-known group of common colubrids distributed throughout North America and northern South America. Despite considerable research focusing on the lampropeltinines, a robust phylogeny has thus far proven elusive. Here, we infer a new phylogeny for the group including all known extant species based on multiple nuclear and mitochondrial genes, and present a revised taxonomy. We also test the hypothesis of a Pleistocene species pump being responsible for the known taxonomic diversity in the group. We find that diversification of all modern genera and most species took place in the Neogene, rejecting the common model of a Pleistocene radiation.
S2395	B. E. Hendrixson;J. E. Bond	2009	Evaluating the Efficacy of Continuous Quantitative Characters for Reconstructing the Phylogeny of a Morphologically Homogeneous Spider Taxon (Araneae, Mygalomorphae, Antrodiaetidae, Antrodiaetus)	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution	53	1	300-313	10.1016/j.ympev.2009.06.001			The use of continuous quantitative characters for phylogenetic analyses has long been contentious in the systematics literature. Recent studies argue for and against their use, but there have been relatively few attempts to evaluate whether these characters provide an accurate estimate of phylogeny, despite the fact that a number of methods have been developed to analyze these types of data for phylogenetic inference. A tree topology will be produced for a given methodology and set of characters, but little can be concluded with regards to the accuracy of phylogenetic signal without an independent evaluation of those characters. We assess the performance of continuous quantitative characters for the mygalomorph spider genus Antrodiaetus, a group that is morphologically homogeneous and one for which few discrete (morphological) characters have been observed. Phylogenetic signal contained in continuous quantitative characters is compared to an independently derived phylogeny inferred on the basis of multiple nuclear and mitochondrial gene loci. Tree topology randomizations, regression techniques, and topological tests all demonstrate that continuous quantitative characters in Antrodiaetus conflict with the phylogenetic signal contained in the gene trees. Our results show that the use of continuous quantitative characters for phylogenetic reconstruction may be inappropriate for reconstructing Antrodiaetus phylogeny and indicate that due caution should be exercised before employing this character type in the absence of other independently derived sources of characters.
S2333	J. Zhou;H. Peng;S. R. Downie;F. D. Pu;X. Gong	2009	Towards a more robust molecular phylogeny of Chinese Apiaceae subfamily Apioideae: additional evidence from nrDNA ITS and cpDNA intron (rpl16 and rps16) sequences	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution	53	1	56-68	10.1016/j.ympev.2009.05.029			China contains some of the world¡¯s greatest diversity of Apiaceae (Umbelliferae), with ten endemic genera. Our previous investigation into the phylogenetic relationships of Chinese Apiaceae subfamily Apioideae, based exclusively on nrDNA ITS sequences, revealed several major clades heretofore unrecognized in the subfamily and confirmed the phylogenetic placements of five endemic genera. To further elucidate relationships among Chinese Apioideae, ascertain the phylogenetic placements of the remaining endemic genera, and test hypotheses of relationships proposed in our earlier study, additional taxa were examined for ITS and, for smaller sets of accessions, cpDNA rpl16 and rps16 intron sequence variation. These ITS and cpDNA data matrices comprised 158 and 131 accessions, respectively, with 110 accessions included in the analysis of combined ITS and cpDNA data. Maximum parsimony and Bayesian analyses of partitioned ITS and chloroplast data sets resulted in highly consistent phylogenies, whereas analyses of combined molecular data resulted in trees of greatest resolution and overall branch support. Two major clades identified in our previous study are recognized at the tribal level: Komarovieae J. Zhou & S. R. Downie trib. nov. and Chamaesieae J. Zhou & F. D. Pu trib. nov. The monotypic tribe Chamaesieae represents one of the earliest diverging lineages of subfamily Apioideae in Asia. The Acronema and East Asia clades of previous circumscription are each expanded. Of the five Chinese endemic genera not examined previously, Chaerophyllopsis finds affinity within tribe Scandiceae subtribe Scandicinae, Chuanminshen allies with Changium and Cyclorhiza in tribe Komarovieae, Harrysmithia falls within the Acronema Clade, Melanosciadium embeds in Angelica in tribe Selineae, and Dickinsia is confirmed as a member of Apiaceae subfamily Azorelloideae. The cpDNA-based phylogenies are not sufficiently resolved in their distal portions to elucidate the tribal placement of the endemic genus Nothosmyrnium, whereas the ITS trees strongly indicate an affinity with tribe Pimpinelleae. The affinities of several Chinese endemic species are also addressed. Peucedanum delavayi, for example, is phylogenetically distant from Sinodielsia and Meeboldia, genera with which it has been allied previously, and shows close affinity to three Chinese species of Ligusticum in tribe Selineae. Aside from providing a framework for taxonomic revisions, the phylogenetic structure recovered in this study for subfamily Apioideae will lay the foundation for future investigations of evolutionary patterns of morphological characters and biogeography.
S2482	J. L. Parra;J. V. Remsen Jr;M. Alvarez-Rebolledo;J. A. McGuire	2009	Molecular phylogenetics of the hummingbird genus Coeligena	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution	53	2	425-434	10.1016/j.ympev.2009.07.006			Advances in the understanding of biological radiations along tropical mountains depend on the knowledge of phylogenetic relationships among species. Here we present a species-level molecular phylogeny based on a multilocus dataset for the Andean hummingbird genus Coeligena. We compare this phylogeny to previous hypotheses of evolutionary relationships and use it as a framework to understand patterns in the evolution of sexual dichromatism and in the biogeography of speciation within the Andes. Previous phylogenetic hypotheses based mostly on similarities in coloration conflicted with our molecular phylogeny, emphasizing the unreliability of color characters for phylogenetic inference. Two major clades, one monochromatic and the other dichromatic, were found in Coeligena. Closely related species were either allopatric or parapatric on opposite mountain slopes. No sister lineages replaced each other along an elevational gradient. Our results indicate the importance of geographic isolation for speciation in this group and the potential interaction between isolation and sexual selection to promote diversification.
S2453	J. R. Clark;W. L. Wagner;E. H. Roalson	2009	Patterns of diversification and ancestral range reconstruction in the Southeast Asian-Pacific angiosperm lineage Cyrtandra (Gesneriaceae)	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution	53	3	982-994	10.1016/j.ympev.2009.09.002			The genus Cyrtandra is the largest in the Gesneriaceae family and is one of the most widely dispersed plant genera in southeast Asia and the Pacific. Species of Cyrtandra are morphologically diverse but characters are often homoplastic causing considerable difficulty in creating monophyletic classification units. In this study, we use a comprehensive molecular phylogenetic analysis, coupled with diversification rates analysis and ancestral range analysis, of 88 taxa representing approximately 80 species, to construct a well-resolved evolutionary hypothesis for Cyrtandra. Using these data, we compare existing classification schemes to our hypothesis to better understand the applicability of these schemes. Our maximum likelihood and Bayesian phylogenetic analyses resulted in a well-supported hypothesis of relationships. Divergence time estimates support a diversification of the Pacific clade at approximately 20 MYBP. Ancestral range reconstruction supports Fiji as the most likely â first-stepâ into the Pacific with subsequent dispersals to Hawaiâ i, and other islands of the Pacific. A greater Fiji-Samoa region, corresponding with Takhtajanâ s Fijian Region, is implicated as a major interface and possibly a center of origin for movement of Cyrtandra into and throughout the Pacific. These results collectively support the following hypotheses: a monophyletic Pacific clade originating somewhere within Takhtajanâ s Fijian Region, paraphyletic Samoan and Fijian clades resulting from their central role in the dispersal patterns for Pacific species, a paraphyletic Society Islands clade, and monophyletic Hawaiian and Marquesan clades. In the South Pacific, several lineages in our evolutionary hypothesis are characterized by distinct morphological traits possibly warranting sectional rankings. Relationships among Hawaiian taxa are less resolved and the distributions of species within this lineage do not consistently correspond to existing sectional rankings. However, several taxa do group according to established taxonomy thus warranting more detailed, population-level research. We suggest that sectional classifications should correspond with major lineages delineated in this study and that species-level relationships should be more closely studied in relation to these delineated lineages.
S2534	M. R. McGowen;M. Spaulding;J. Gatesy	2009	Divergence date estimation and a comprehensive molecular tree of extant cetaceans	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution	53	3	891–906	10.1016/j.ympev.2009.08.018			Cetaceans are remarkable among mammals for their numerous adaptations to an entirely aquatic existence, yet many aspects of their phylogeny remain unresolved. Here we merged 37 new sequences from the nuclear genes RAG1 and PRM1 with most published molecular data for the group (45 nuclear loci, transposons, mitochondrial genomes), and generated a supermatrix consisting of 42,335 characters. The great majority of these data have never been combined. Model-based analyses of the supermatrix produced a solid, consistent phylogenetic hypothesis for 87 cetacean species. Bayesian analyses corroborated odontocete (toothed whale) monophyly, stabilized basal odontocete relationships, and completely resolved branching events within Mysticeti (baleen whales) as well as the problematic speciose clade Delphinidae (oceanic dolphins). Only limited con&#64258;icts relative to maximum likelihood results were recorded, and discrepancies found in parsimony trees were very weakly supported. We utilized the Bayesian supermatrix tree to estimate divergence dates among lineages using relaxed-clock methods. Divergence estimates revealed rapid branching of basal odontocete lineages near the Eocene Oligocene boundary, the antiquity of river dolphin lineages, a Late Miocene radiation of balaenopteroid mysticetes, and a recent rapid radiation of Delphinidae beginning 10 million years ago. Our comprehensive, time-calibrated tree provides a powerful evolutionary tool for broad-scale comparative studies of Cetacea.
S2408	H. Nozaki;S. Maruyama;M. Matsuzaki;T. Nakada;S. Kato;K. Misawa	2009	Phylogenetic positions of Glaucophyta, green plants (Archaeplastida) and Haptophyta (Chromalveolata) as deduced from slowly evolving nuclear genes	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution	53	3	872-880	10.1016/j.ympev.2009.08.015			The phylogenetic positions of the primary photosynthetic eukaryotes, or Archaeplastida (green plants, red algae, and glaucophytes) and the secondary photosynthetic chromalveolates, Haptophyta, vary depending on the data matrices used in the previous nuclear multigene phylogenetic studies. Here, we deduced the phylogeny of three groups of Archaeplastida and Haptophyta on the basis of sequences of the slowly evolving multiple nuclear genes and reduced the gaps or missing data, especially in glaucophyte operational taxonomic units (OTUs). The present multigene phylogenetic analyses resolved that Haptophyta and two groups of Chromalveolata, stramenopiles and Alveolata, form a monophyletic group that is sister to the green plants and that the glaucophytes and red algae are basal to the clade composed of green plants and Chromalveolata. The bootstrap values supporting these phylogenetic relationships increased with the exclusion of long-branched OTUs. The close relationship between green plants and Chromalveolata is further supported by the common replacement in two plastid-targeted genes.
S2454	J. J. Sato;M. Wolsan;S. Minami;T. Hosoda;M. H. Shinaga;K. Hiyama;Y. Yamaguchi;H. Suzuki	2009	Deciphering and dating the red panda’s ancestry and early adaptive radiation of Musteloidea	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution	53	3	907-922	10.1016/j.ympev.2009.08.019			Few species have been of more disputed affinities than giant (Ailuropoda melanoleuca) and the red or lesser (Ailurus fulgens) pandas, peculiar endemic Southeast Asian vegetarian members of the placental mammalian order Carnivora. Whereas the bear nature of giant panda has ultimately been demonstrated convincingly based on both morphologic and genetic grounds, the phylogenetic position of the red panda has remained elusive despite numerous attempts and a variety of data classes analyzed. We examined the relationship of the red panda to other carnivorans using a set of concatenated ~5.5-kb sequences from protein-coding exons of five nuclear genes (APOB, BRCA1, RAG1, RBP3 [IRBP], and VWF). Bayesian, maximum likelihood, and parsimony analyses resulted in almost identical phylogenetic reconstructions. The red panda was robustly supported as the closest living relative of a clade containing raccoons (family Procyonidae) and weasels, otters, martens, badgers, and allies (family Mustelidae), with the clade of skunks and stink badgers (family Mephitidae) as having diverged more basally. The three families together with the red panda (which is classified here as a single extant species of a distinct family, Ailuridae) compose the superfamily Musteloidea, a clade strongly supported as the sister taxon to the monophyletic Pinnipedia (seals, sea lions, walruses). The approximately unbiased, Kishino-Hasegawa, and Templeton topology tests significantly rejected alternative hypotheses about the red panda fs relationships within Musteloidea. Our finding is the first conclusive resolution of the red panda fs phylogenetic position, a solution to an evolutionary riddle that has persisted for almost two centuries. Our result shows that at ~28 to 35 Myr-old levels of phylogenetic divergence (which correspond to an estimated interval for the origin of all extant musteloid families), nuclear DNA sequences (when combined from multiple genes) can be more informative and effective than mitochondrial sequences in resolving relationships.
S2444	J. W. Streicher;A. J. Crawford;C. W. Edwards	2009	Multilocus molecular phylogenetic analysis of the montane Craugastor podiciferus species complex (Anura: Craugastoridae) in Isthmian Central America	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution	53	3	620-630	10.1016/j.ympev.2009.07.011			The Craugastor podiciferus complex is a group of phenotypically polymorphic direct-developing frogs that inhabit the Talamancan highlands of Costa Rica and Panama. The montane distribution of this group creates natural allopatry among members and offers a unique opportunity to explore patterns of gene flow and the geography of speciation. Using a multilocus approach, we obtained data from one nuclear (c-myc) and three mitochondrial (12S, 16S, and COI) gene regions from 40 individuals within the C. podiciferus complex. Molecular phylogenetic analyses revealed a basal split that placed samples from western Panama as sister to Costa Rican (CR) samples, corroborating a previous suggestion that the former lineage may represent an undescribed species. Within the CR clades we found 6 distinct haplogroups whose distributions largely corresponded to geographic features and included some instances of sympatry. Divergence estimates were used to develop a preliminary evolutionary timeframe for the diversification of the C. podiciferus complex. Based on collective evidence, we hypothesize that movement of the CR haplogroups has occurred between currently isolated areas of suitable habitat via second order climatic fluctuations during the Pleistocene. The levels of genetic differentiation within the C. podiciferus complex are remarkable given the relatively small geographic area (ca. 8,000 km2) of occurrence. This diversity emphasizes the need for further study and taxonomic revision to aid in conservation planning for this complex which, like many amphibians, has experienced recent population declines.
S2387	M. C. Hedin;S. M. Thomas	2009	Molecular systematics of eastern North American Phalangodidae (Arachnida: Opiliones: Laniatores), demonstrating convergent morphological evolution in caves	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution	54	1	107-121	10.1016/j.ympev.2009.08.020			The phalangodid harvestmen (Opiliones: Laniatores) fauna of the southeastern United States has remained obscure since original descriptions of many genera and species over 60 years ago. The obscurity of this interesting group is pervasive, with uncertainty regarding basic systematic information such as generic limits, species limits, and geographic distributions. This situation is unfortunate, as the fauna includes several cave-obligate forms of interest from both conservation and evolutionary perspectives, and the group likely exhibits interesting biogeographic patterns because of their low dispersal ability. Here we use DNA sequence data from two genes to reconstruct phylogenetic relationships of southeastern phalangodid taxa, for a sample of all described genera from the region. Our results demonstrate that the southeastern fauna is likely monophyletic, and is most-closely related to western North American phalangodids with a similar penis morphology. Within the southeastern clade, trends in the evolution of penis morphology correspond broadly to molecular phylogenetic patterns, although penis evolution is overall relatively conservative in the group. Biogeographically, it appears that western taxa in the southeast (i.e., from west of the Appalachian Valley) are early-diverging, with later diversification in the montane southern Blue Ridge, and subsequent diversification back towards the west. This W > E > W pattern has been observed in other groups from the southeast. The multiple cave-modified species in the region are genetically divergent and appear phylogenetically isolated; explicit topological hypothesis testing suggests that troglomorphism has evolved convergently in at least three independent lineages. The total number of species in the region remains uncertain mitochondrial COI data reveal many highly-divergent, geographically coherent groups that might represent undescribed species, but these divergent mitochondrial lineages do not always exhibit divergence in either nuclear sequences or penis morphology. Many questions remain, but our studies provide a solid framework for further systematic investigations of this interesting group.
S2447	A. D. Leaché	2009	Species Trees for Spiny Lizards (Genus Sceloporus): Identifying Points of Concordance and Conflict between Nuclear and Mitochondrial Data	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution	54	1	162-171	10.1016/j.ympev.2009.09.006			Spiny lizards (genus Sceloporus) represent one of the most diverse and species rich clades of squamate reptiles in continental North America. Sceloporus contains 90+ species, which are partitioned into 21 species groups that contain anywhere from one to 15 species. Despite substantial progress towards elucidating the phylogeographic patterns for many species, efforts to resolve the phylogenetic relationships among the species groups remain limited. In this study, the phylogenetic relationships of 53 species of Sceloporus, representing all 21 species groups, are estimated based on four nuclear genes (BDNF, PNN, R35, RAG-1; >3.3 kb) and contrasted with a new mitochondrial DNA genealogy based on six genes (12S, ND1, ND4, and the histidine, serine, and leucine tRNA genes; > 2.5 kb). Species trees estimated from the nuclear loci using data concatenation or a coalescent-based inference method result in concordant topologies, but the coalescent approach provides lower resolution and support. When comparing nuclear versus mtDNA-based topologies for Sceloporus species groups, conflicting relationships outnumber concordant relationships. Incongruence is not restricted to weak or unresolved nodes, as might be expected under a scenario of rapid diversification, but extends to conflicts involving clades receiving strong support. The points of concordance and conflict between the nuclear and mtDNA data are discussed, and arguments for preferring the species trees estimated from the multilocus nuclear data are presented.
S2524	P. Skaloud;O. Peksa	2010	Evolutionary inferences based on ITS rDNA and actin sequences reveal extensive diversity of the common lichen alga Asterochloris (Trebouxiophyceae, Chlorophyta)	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution	54	1	36-46	10.1016/j.ympev.2009.09.035			The genus Asterochloris is one of the most common lichen photobionts. We present a molecular investigation of 41 cultured strains, for which nuclear-encoded ITS rDNA and partial actin I sequences were determined. The loci studied revealed considerable differences in their evolutionary dynamics as well as sequence variation. As compared to ITS data, the actin sequences show much greater variation, and the phylogenies yield strong resolution and support of many internal branches. The partitioning of ITS dataset into several regions yielded better node resolution. We recognized sixteen well-supported monophyletic lineages, of which one represents the type species of the genus (Asterochloris phycobiontica), and six correspond to species previously classified to the genus Trebouxia (T. erici, T. excentrica, T. glomerata, T. irregularis, T. italiana and T. magna). Only 15% of isolated photobionts considered in our study could be assigned with certainty to previously described species, emphasizing amazing cryptic variability in Asterochloris. Concurrently with the formal delimitation of the genus Asterochloris, we propose new combinations for the former Trebouxia species; furthermore, T. pyriformis is reduced to a synonym of A. glomerata. The present knowledge of global diversity of Asterochloris algae is discussed.
S2508	A. J. Barley;P. Q. Spinks;R. C. Thomson;H. B. Shaffer	2010	Fourteen nuclear genes provide phylogenetic resolution for difficult nodes in the turtle tree of life	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution	55	3	1189-1194	10.1016/j.ympev.2009.11.005			Advances in molecular biology have expanded our understanding of patterns of evolution and our ability to infer phylogenetic relationships. Despite many applications of molecular methods in attempts at resolving the evolutionary relationships among the major clades of turtles, some nodes in the tree have proved to be extremely problematic and have remained unresolved. In this study, we use fourteen nuclear loci to provide an in depth look at several of these troublesome nodes and infer the systematic relationships among 11 of the 14 turtle families. We find strong support for two of the most problematic nodes in the deep phylogeny of turtles that have traditionally defied resolution. In particular, we recover strong support for a sister relationship between the Emydidae and the monotypic bigheaded-turtle, Platysternon megacephalum. We also find strong support for a clade consisting of sea turtles, mud and musk turtles, and snapping turtles. Within this clade, we find strong support for a snapping turtle/mud and musk turtle sister relationship. Our results emphasize the utility of multi-locus datasets in phylogenetic analyses of difficult problems
S2536	M. Dabert;W. Witalinski;A. Kazmierski;Z. Olszanowski;J. Dabert	2010	Molecular phylogeny of acariform mites (Acari, Arachnida): strong conflict between phylogenetic signal and long-branch attraction artifacts	Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution	56	1	222-241	10.1016/j.ympev.2009.12.020			Acariformes (one of the two main lineages of Acari) represent an exceptionally diverse group of Arachnida. We performed first comprehensive phylogenetic analysis of Acariformes using sequence data from the nuclear small subunit rRNA gene (18S rDNA) and the mitochondrial cytochrome c oxidase subunit I (COI, amino acids). Our analyses confirm the monophyly of Acariformes and recognize two orders within Acariformes: Sarcoptiformes, consisting of Endeostigmata and Oribatida + Astigmata, and Trombidiformes. The data revealed the origin of Astigmata within Oribatida with the desmonomatan superfamily Crotonioidea as the source of astigmatan radiation and the sexual family Hermanniidae as the sister group, which generally supports previous morphological hypotheses. These results were found despite the strong conflict between long-branch attraction (LBA) artifacts and phylogenetic signal. It is likely that the conflict resulted from differences in the substitution rates among acariform lineages, especially comparing slowly evolving Oribatida with rapidly evolving Astigmata. The use of likelihood methods considered more resistant to LBA only slightly decreased the chance of falling into the LBA trap; the probability of recovering the origin of Astigmata within Desmonomata differs only by about 10% from that of having the long branched Astigmata and Trombidiformes either connected directly or shifted to deep parts of the tree due to outgroup attraction. Molecular dating using the rate-smoothing method PATHd8 shows that Acariformes originated c. 435 MYA and were probably among the earliest arthropods invading terrestrial habitats in late Silurian or the Lower Devonian, when the first vascular plants are thought to have arisen. We recovered clades Acariformes-Solifugida and Parasitiformes-Pseudoscorpionida, which did not support the monophyly of Acari. However, a formal revision of arachnid classification that would reflect these results must await future analyses.
S1574	N. Zellerhoff;B. Jarosch;J. Z. Groenewald;P. W. Crous;U. Schaffrath	2006	Non-host resistance of barley is successfully manifested against Magnaporthe grisea and a closely related Pennisetum-infecting lineage, but is overcome by Magnaporthe oryzae	Molecular Plant-Microbe Interactions	19	9	1014-1022				Magnaporthe oryzae is a major pathogen of rice (Oryza sativa L.) but is also able to infect other grasses including barley (Hordeum vulgare L.). Here, we report a study using isolates of Magnaporthe collected from other host plant species to evaluate their capacity to infect barley. A non-host type of resistance was detected in barley against isolates derived from Pennisetum (fontaingrass) or Digitaria (crabgrass) but no resistance occurred in response to isolates from rice, Eleusine (goosegrass), wheat (Triticum aestivum L.) or maize (Zea mays L.), respectively. Restriction of pathogen growth in the non-host interaction was investigated microscopically and compared with compatible interactions. Real-time PCR was used to quantify fungal biomass in both types of interaction. The phylogenetic relationship among the Magnaporthe isolates used in this study was investigated by inferring gene trees for fragments of three genes: actin, calmodulin and beta-tubulin. Based on phylogenetic analysis we could distinguish different species which were strictly correlated with the ability of the isolates to infect barley. We demonstrated that investigating specific host interaction phenotypes for a range of pathogen isolates can accurately highlight genetic diversity within a pathogen population.
S1333	S. Hayashi	2005	The Molecular Phylogeny of the Buccinidae (Caenogastropoda: Neogastropoda) as Inferred from the Complete Mitochondrial 16S rRNA Gene Sequences of Selected Representatives	Molluscan Research	25						Complete mitochondrial 16S rRNA gene sequences from 35 caenogastropods were obtained to evaluate the phylogenetic relationship of the family Buccinidae at the intra-supra familial level. With respect to intergeneric relationships within the family, the molecular phylogeny supported three clades with statistical significance: Buccinum + Neptunea, Engina + Pisania + Pollia and Penion + Kelletia. These groupings are generally consistent with the morphological and paleontological evidence. In particular, it is noteworthy that the monophyly of Penion and Kelletia was established. Their close relationship as antitropical genera is confirmed for the first time. Babylonia was positioned remotely from the other buccinids confirming recent morphological and molecular work. The monophyly of the current concept of Buccinidae was violated by intercalations of nassariids and fasciolariids.
S1535	D. J. Colgan;W. F. Ponder;P. d Costa	2006	Mitochondrial DNA variation in an endemic aquatic snail genus, Caldicochlea (Hydrobiidae; Caenogastropoda) in Dalhousie Springs, an Australian arid-zone spring complex	Molluscan Research							The gastropod genus Caldicochlea, with two recognized species C. harrisi and C. globosa, is endemic to Dalhousie Springs, an artesian spring system in arid northern South Australia. A previous study using allozymes showed that C. harrisi is found in most of the active outflows but C. globosa is confined to the larger, hotter springs in the northern third of the complex where the species are sympatric, and that hybridization may be frequent in only two springs. The evolutionary relationships within Caldicochlea were investigated using 16S ribosomal RNA (16S: 75 sequences) and cytochrome c oxidase I (COI: 27 sequences). Clades corresponding to the two species are seen in both the 16S and COI analyses, the average Kimura 2-parameter distance between the clades being 0.028 ± 0.007 for 16S rRNA and 0.040 ± 0.016 for COI with no evidence that the recognized taxa represent species complexes. Only four of 22 16S haplotypes in C. harrisi were found in more than one spring and only two of 12 in C. globosa. No COI haplotype was found in more than one spring. In one spring where earlier research suggested that interbreeding may occur, all scored DNA sequences belonged to the C. harrisi clade and in the other such spring all scored sequences belonged to the C. globosa clade. The data do not clarify whether the time of primary divergence between the species occurred in situ at Dalhousie Springs. The absence of suitable habitat refugia since the onset of Pleistocene aridity suggests that the species have been sympatric or parapatric over tens of thousands of years, raising questions as to how an incomplete reproductive isolation can be maintained and how both species could persist in such a geographically restricted area.
S290	A. G. C. Grandison	1981	Morphology and phylogenetic position of the West African Didynamipus sjoestedti Andersson, 1903 (Anura Bufonidae)	Monitore Zoologico Italiano	11		187-215				From a comparison of the skull, vertebral column, pectoral girdle, certain myological and external morphological features and aspects of reproductive biology of Didynamipus sjoestedti Andersson, 1903 (Anura) with other African bufonids it is deduced that the African bufonids belong to at least three evolutionary lineages. One of these comprises Didynamipus, Nectophrynoides, Nectophryne, Werneria, Wolterstofina, Laurentophryne and two Scuth African species that were until recently referred to Bulo. The characteristics distinguishing this assemblage from the others are stated and a diagnosis of Didynamipus given. For each of 24 characters the evolutionary direction of change is inferred. From an analysis of the derived character states a phylogenetic hypothesis is constructed that suggests that Didynamipus is more closely related to West African Nectophrynoides than to any of the Cameroun genera Nectophryne is considered the most advanced genus in the assemblage. It is further suggested that the assemblage to which Didynamipus belongs is no more distant from Australian myobatrachids than from other African bufonids.
S218	T. E. Stasz;K. Nixon;G. E. Harman;N. F. Weeden;G. A. Kuter	1989	Evaluation of phenetic species and phylogenetic relationships within the genus Trichoderma by cladistic analysis of isozyme polymorphism	Mycologia	81		391-403				Taxonomy in Trichoderma is problematic because of the lack of reliable morphological characters. This study evaluates five morphological species using methods of isozyme analysis that allow determination of allozyme polymorphism. One hundred nine alleles were resolved at 16 putative enzyme loci among 71 strains tested. Morphological species were not characterized either by specific alleles at single loci or by specific patterns of alleles at multiple loci. Rather, most alleles were distributed among most species, and each species included several different alleles at most loci. Allele patterns were analysed by phylogenetic analysis using parsimony (PAUP). A strict consensus tree was derived from 20 equally parsimonious, shortest cladograms using Gliocladium virens as an outgroup. In the resulting cladogram, T. harzianum included a main group of strains adjacent to the outgroup and other strains distributed throughout the cladogram; this species appears to be paraphyletic. A core group of T. pseudokoningii strains appears to be monophyletic and derived directly from a T. harzianum-like ancestral group. Trichoderma hamatum included three isozymically distinct strains with close affinity to Gliocladium virens and a main group which appears to have been derived from a T. harzianum-like ancestral group independently of the core group of T. pseudokoningii. Trichoderma koningii and T. viride are not well distinguished from each other, but T. viride appears to be more derived and may have arisen from a more ancestral T. koningii type. Phylogenetic analysis of allozyme data identified isozymically similar core groups of strains within morphological species, clusters of strains from various species, and isozymically distinct strains for further study. Wide distribution of numerous alleles among morphological species suggests that extensive genetic exchange occurs among these taxa.
S214	J. B. Morton	1990	Evolutionary relationships among arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi in the Endogonaceae	Mycologia	82		192-207				A cladistic analysis of 57 species in six genera of the Endogonaceae was performed using 27 morphological characters of asexual spores and the endophytic phase of mycorrhizal development. These species comprised a monophyletic group defined by two synapomorphies: mutualistic symbiosis with terrestrial plants and production of specialized dichotomously branched intraradical arbuscules interfacing host and fungal symbiont. Members of Endogone, another genus in the Endogonaceae, did not share these characters and thus were a polyphyletic group related to some arbuscular species in Clomus and Sclerocystis only by convergence. Two main branches were hypothesized to have evolved from a common arbuscular ancestor. One branch consisted of Cigaspora and Scutellospora, as defined by extraradical auxiliary cells and spores formed within a thin unit wall on a sporogenous cell. The other branch consisted of Clomus, Sclerocystis, Acaulospora, and Entrophospora, as defined by intraradical vesicles in mycorrhizal roots. Parallelisms were numerous within all descendant monophyletic fungal groups, lowering resolution of branching patterns. The cladogram and phylogenetic tree reconstructed from this analysis establish a theoretical framework for future studies.
S3x27x98c14c13c36	G. L. Benny;R. K. Benjamin	1991	The Radiomycetaceae (Mucorales; Zygomycetes).III.A new species of Radiomyces, and cladistic analysis and taxonomy of the family; with a discussion of the evolutionary ordinal relationships in Zygomycotina	Mycologia	83		713-735				The family Radiomycetaceae, which includes two genera, Hesseltinella and Radiomyces, is based, in part, on the production of a unique sporangiolum-bearing structure consisting of a once-septate stalk terminated by a vesicle bearing one or many uni- or multispored sporangiola. Zygospores, where known, have in common a smooth zygosporangial wall and opposed, appendage-bearing suspensors. Hesseltinella vesiculosa, the only known species of the genus, produces its stalked sporangiolum-bearing structures in lateral, subterminal, or terminal clusters. Only one sporangiolum is formed per fertile vesicle; sporangiolar appendages are acicular with flattened, hexagonal bases, and zygospores are unknown. The fungus is presumably heterothallic. In Radiomyces the sporangiolum-bearing branches always arise terminally on the enlarged apex of the sporangiophore and many sporangiola are formed per fertile vesicle; sporangiolar appendages are capitate or spathulate: zygospores are as described above, and the taxa are homothallic. A new species, Radiomyces mexicana, is described. This species resembles R. embreei but differs in having: 1 ) somewhat smaller spore-bearing structures, 2) globose to obpyriform (not sphaeroidal) fertile vesicles, 3) relatively thick-walled sporophore vesicles and fertile vesicles, 4) a slower rate of sporangiospore germination, and 5) a lower upper temperature range for good growth. On certain media a variable percentage of zygosporangia are ovoid to ellipsoid and the sporophore often has a pronounced subsporangial constriction. A cladistic analysis revealed that the genera of Radiomycetaceae and the family are each monophyletic. Radiomyces embreei and R. rnexicana are more closely related to one another than to R. spectabilis because they are unispored (a synapomorphy). Radiomyces embreei and R. mexicana are characterized by autapomorphies and are considered monophyletic. Keys to the genera and species are provided.
S3x30x98c19c50c08	D. S. Hibbett;R. Vilgalys	1991	Evolutionary relationships of Lentinus to the Polyporaceae: evidence from restriction analysis of enzymatically amplified ribosomal DNA	Mycologia	83		425-439				Evolutionary relationships of Lentinus to the Tricholomataceae and Polyporaceae were studied using restriction analysis of nuclear-encoded ribosomal RNA genes (rDNA). Five species of Lentinus, three species in the Polyporaceae and two species in the Tricholomataceae were examined. Ribosomal DNA phenotypes were determined by restriction endonuclease digestion of enzymatically amplified rDNA (PCR fingerprinting). This method generates restriction fragment length polymorphism data without Southern blotting or autoradiography. With five different four-base restriction enzymes, one hundred and one unique restriction fragments were resolved. Among the 16 individuals studied, there were twelve different rDNA types. A similarity matrix based on presence or absence of comigrating restriction fragments was analyzed with UPGMA, complete and single-linkage analysis (using the NTSYS computer package), and Fitch-Margoliash and KITSCH analysis (using the PHYLIP computer package). Results of all analytical approaches were highly consistent and strongly suggest that Lentinus tigrinus is more closely related to the Polyporaceae than to the Tricholomataceae. Morphological characters (dimitic hyphac and hyphal pegs) also support this hypothesis. The other species of Lentinus appear to be intermediate between the Polyporaceae and Tricholomataceae and could not be clcarly assigned to either family. The results also suggest that Lentinus is paraphyletic and, therefore, that lamellae have arisen repeatedly by convergent evolution.
S217	F. Sieber-Canavesi;O. Petrini;T. N. Sieber	1991	Endophytic Leptostroma species on Picea abies, Abies alba, and Abies balsamea: a cultural, biochemical, and numerical study	Mycologia	83		89-96				Growth on different media, substrate utilization patterns, water-soluble protein electrophoretic properties, as well as pectinase and amylase multilocus enzyme analyses were used to characterize thirty-seven endophytic strains of Leptostroma isolated from needles of Picea abies, Abies alba, and A. balsamea. Among substrate utilization tests, only proteolytic activity, almost absent in the spruce isolates but usually present in the others, could be used for characterization of strains. All isolates tested positive for the Bavendamm reaction and were able to utilize soluble starch and cellulose. Electrophoresis of water soluble proteins provided a reliable method to distinguish isolates from different hosts because electromorphs were host-specific. Electrophoresis of pectic enzymes allowed a more accurate differentiation of strains within host, but, on the whole, host-specificity of electromorphs was confirmed. Amylolytic activity was absent in ca 50% of the strains tested and the same electromorph was shared by roughly 80% of the remaining isolates. The results of this study support the hypothesis that distinct species of Leptostroma, which are morphologically almost indistinguishable from each other, colonize apparently healthy needles of A. alba, A. balsamea, and P. abies. Ecophysiologically all isolates showed biochemical attributes associated with needle penetration and long-term residence within needles.
S3x18x98c14c47c20	G. Baura;T. M. Szaro;T. D. Bruns	1992	Gastrosuillus laricinus is a recent derivative of Suillus grevillei: molecular evidence	Mycologia	84		592-597				None
S3x27x98c13c45c14	G. L. Benny;R. K. Benjamin;P. M. Kirk	1992	A reevaluation of Cunninghamellaceae (Mucorales).Sigmoideomycetaceae Fam. Nov. and Reticulocephalis Gen. Nov.; cladistic analysis and description of two new species	Mycologia	84		615-641				A new family, Sigmoideomycetaceae, is proposcd for Sigmoideomyces, Thamnocephalis, and a new genus Reticulocephalis. The family is characterized by sporophores having fertile heads composed of dichotomously branched, coiled hyphae in which the width of the coil is largest distally. Usually, each branch terminates in a sterile spine, which can either be free or adherent to other spines; modified spines may bear hyphal coils. All fruiting hyphae, including spines or modified spines, are irregularly septate at maturity. Cells formed at each branching point of a sporangiophore, except the final one or two, bear a pair of stalked fertile vesicles covered with pedicellate, unispored sporangiola. Reticulocephalis, Sigmoideomyces, and Thamnocephalis have similarly constructed fertile heads but differ in the habit of the sporophore. In Thamnocephalis the fruiting structure is stalked and the fertile head is elevated well above the substratum, whereas in Reticulocephalis and Sigmoideomyces the fruiting structure is sessile or procumbent. In Reticulocephalis the sterile spines have adherent tips and the sporangiola are smooth walled, whereas in Sigmoideomyces the sterile spines are free and the sporangiola have finely echinulate walls. Two new species are described: Reticulocephalis gyrosus, which produces coils of hyphae on the apices of modified sterile spines, and Thamnocephalis sphaerospora which forms smooth-walled to faintly spinose sporangiola and spherical to obovoid fertile vesicles. Sigmoideomyces divaricatus is emended to indicate that the sterile spines are nearly evanescent, leaving behind only a wispy remnant of the wall, which is not due to filamentous bacteria as suggested by the original author. Sigmoideomycetaceae are hypothesized to be monophyletic. Reticulocephalis, Sigmoideomyces, and Thamnocephalis, and all of their species, are monophyletic. All three genera are patristically equidistant from the hypothetical ancestor. Only Cunninghamella is retained in Cunninghamellaceae. Keys to the genera and species are provided. A revised family description is presented for Cunninghamellaceae.
S223	P. J. Zambino;T. C. Harrington	1992	Correspondence of isozyme characterization with morphology in the asexual genus Leptographium and taxonomic implications	Mycologia	84	1	12-25				The similarity of 88 isolates of 27 species of Leptographium was studied using enzyme electrophoresis. UGPMA cluster analysis of similarity matrices (Nei genetic identity, I) generated from data of 267 electrophoretic forms (electromorphs) of 15 enzymes showed a close correspondence between electrophoretic similarity and morphology. Isolates of a species had high similarity and clustered at I ≥ 0.60, and in cases where different taxa clustered at I > 0.60, an examination of the morphology and history of the isolates suggested conspecificity. Isozyme characterization was also useful for identifying the extent of morphologic variation within versus between species and for comparing isolates with degenerate morphology after prolonged culture.
S3x27x98c14c25c41	G. L. Benny;R. K. Benjamin	1993	Observations on Thamnidiaceae (Mucorales).VI.Two new species of dichotomocladium and the zygospores of D. hesseltinei (Chaetocladiaceae)	Mycologia	85		660-671				Two new species are described in Dichotomocladium. One species with globose sporangiola, D. sphaerosporum, was isolated from dung collected in Mianwali, Pakistan and is similar to D. elegans in its general habit. The second species with obovoid sporangiola, D. Jioridanum, was isolated from dung collected in Gainesville, Florida, and resembles D. robustum. The zygospores of D. hesseltinei have hemispherical suspensors and are described for the first time. Chaetocladiaceae is revived for fungi having branched (dichotomous, verticillate) fertile hyphae, pedicellate, unispored sporangiola which are produced on fertile vesicles, and sterile spines. Dichotomocladium is transferred to Chaetocladiaceae, which contains only one other genus, Chaetocladium. Chaetocladium and Dichotomocladiurn each are considered monophyletic, and together comprise the monophyletic Chaetocladiaceae. Keys are provided to the genera of Chaetocladiaceae and the species of Dichotomocladium. A list of families and genera currently included in Mucorales also is provided.
S3x30x98c20c15c15	J. S. J. Hopple;R. Vilgalys	1994	Phylogenetic relationships among coprinoid taxa and allies based on data from restriction site mapping of nuclear rDNA	Mycologia	86		96-107				Phylogenetic relationships among coprinoid and closely related taxa were studied using restriction site data. Seven taxa in Coprinus (C. comatus, C. atramentarius, C. cinereus, C. micaceus, C. cordisporus, C. plicatilis, C. curtus), five potential sister group taxa (Psathyrella gracilis, Panaeolus semiovatus, Bolbitius vitellinus, Agrocybe praecox, Stropharia rugosoannulata), and two secotioid taxa (Podaxis pistillaris and Montagnea arenaria) were investigated. Restriction analysis was carried out on enzymatically amplified portions of the nuclear gene coding for the large ribosomal subunit RNA and the internally transcribed spacer region II. A total of 153 sites were mapped, of which 54 were phylogenetically informative. Six equally-most parsimonious networks were resolved using cladistic methods. One of these six networks was identified as best supported using a stepmatrix to weight restriction site gains over losses (character-state weighting). This tree demonstrates that: 1, the genus Coprinus is at least paraphyletic and probably polyphyletic; 2, Psathyrella is derived from within Coprinus; 3, the two secotioid taxa are closely related to Coprinus comatus; and, 4, the sister genus to Coprinus is Bolbitius. The branches of the character-state weighted tree have support similar to identical branches from the equally weighted tree as evidenced by three robustness indices. The character-state weighted tree provides a phylogenetic hypothesis similar to a strict consensus tree from unweighted parsimony analysis, but has the advantage of being fully resolved and thus provides a more detailed hypothesis for future research.
S216	G. J. Samuels;O. Petrini;S. Manguin	1994	Morphological and macromolecular characterization of Hypocrea schweinitzii and its Trichoderma anamorph	Mycologia	86		421-435				Morphological, cultural, and isozyme analyses were used to determine variation in the Trichoderma anamorph of Hypocrea schweinitzii, a presumably unequivocal species of Trichoderma, and to assess whether the anamorph of H. schweinitzii can be assigned to T. longibrachiatum, T. reesei, or T. pseudokoningii. The results of these studies indicate that H. schweinitzii comprises at least three distinct and taxonomically separable holomorph taxa that coincide with the geographical origin of the collections. The name H. schweinitzii can be applied to Northern Hemisphere and H. jecorina to tropical American collections; while taxonomically distinct, no name was given to a Chinese collection. The holomorphs or H. schweinitzii, H. jecorina, and the Chinese collection showed little intraspecific variation in morphology of the teleomorph or anamorph, or in cultural and isozyme characters. They exhibited no more variation than was noted in the ex type cultures of the named Trichoderma species. None of the named Trichoderma species coincided with any of the Hypocrea species studied. It is concluded that Trichoderma species in general can be narrowly defined but that morphology alone might not suffice to allow the identification of species. The synonymy of T. reesei under T. longibrachiatum is not supported by morphological and cultural observations and by isozyme data and it is therefore not accepted.
S3x27x98c14c07c19	G. L. Benny	1995	Observations on Thamnidiaceae. VII. Helicostylum and a new genus Kirkia	Mycologia	87	2	253-264		http://www.jstor.org/stable/3760911	Chaetostylum; Circinella; cladistics; Helicostylum; Kirkia; Mucorales; phylogeny; Thamnostylum; Zygomycetes	The genus Helicostylum was restricted to two species, H. elegans and H. pulchrum, based on the phylogenetic species concept. Helicostylum species were ditinguished from other genera of Thamnidiaceae by the production of 1) relatively large, multispored, deliquesent-walled sporangia at the apices of the sporangiophores and 2) pedicellate, relatively small, persistent-walled sporangiola laterally from the sporangiophore itself or from lateral branchlets having elongate, sterile, spine-like terminations. In some cases a given sporangiophore bears only sporangia or sporangiola. The lateral, fertile branches arose singly, in pairs, or in verticels or pseudoverticels of three to 20. Zygospores were described for the first time for H. pulchrum. A new genus Kirkia was based on H. cordense, which lacks spinelike fertile branches and has an optimal growth temperature of 25 C vs slightly below 20 C for species of Helicostylum. A cladistic analysis using representative species of all sporangiate Thamnidiaceae demonstrated that Helicostylum and Kirkia resided in separate clades. Selected strains of all species of Helicostylum were included in the analysis. Helicostylum venustellum was considered a synonym of H. pulchrum. All taxa were illustrated with line drawings. Keys were provided to genera and species, and an extensive list of synonyms was presented.
S3x30x98c12c42c56	D. S. Hibbett;Y. Fukumasa-Nakai;A. Tsuneda;M. J. Donoghue	1995	Phylogenetic diversity in shiitake inferred from nuclear ribosomal DNA sequences	Mycologia	87	5	618-638		http://www.jstor.org/stable/3760806	biogeography; conservation; edible fungi; ITS; Lentinula; phylogeny; shiitake ; 	Phylogenetic relationships of the edible shiitake mushroom (Lentinula, Tricholomataceae) were studied using DNA sequences from the internal transcribed spacers (ITS) of nuclear ribosomal DNA. The ingroup consisted of seven isolates of L. edodes from Japan and Thailand, nine isolates of L. lateritia from Borneo, Papua New Guinea, and Tasmania, and five isolates of L. novaezelandieae from New Zealand. These species designations are based on morphological species concepts in Lentinula. However, because Lentinula isolates from throughout Asia-Australasia are mating compatible, some authors treat all of these as belonging to L. edodes. The outgroup included two isolates of L. boryana from Mexico. Parsimony, distance, and maximum likelihood analyses were performed, with various combinations of taxa, characters, and character codings, and bootstrap and decay index measures of robustncss. Alternate topologies were evaluated in terms of tree lengths, maximum likelihood ratios, and Templeton's nonparametric test of parsimony. Results suggest that there are four independent lineages of shiitake in Asia-Australasia, which provides partial support for the morphologically based species concepts. Lentinula novaezelandieae and L. edodes sensu stricto were supported as monophyletic, but L. lateritia appears to be paraphyletic. A corollary of this is that the morphology of L. laleritia should be plesiomorphic for shiitake, which seems plausible based on outgroup comparison. In general, there is a strong correlation between the geographic origins of the isolates and the lineages supported. Biogeographic interpretation of ITS trees suggests that the ancestral area for shiitake in Asia-Australasia is in the South Pacific, which was the most phylogenetically diverse area examined. Phylogenetic analyses including previously published ITS2 sequences of three shiitake isolates of unknown origin placed the unknown isolates in a group of L. edodes sensu stricto isolates from Japan and Thailand, which suggests that the unknown isolates are from northeast or continental Asia. ITS-based cladograms have points of agreement as well as disagreement with previously published mitochondrial DNA-based dendrograms from a subset of the isolates used in this study. Discrepancies between the ITS and mtDNA trees could mean that the nuclear ITS and the mttDA have different evolutionary histories. However, comparison of mtDNA and ITS data are complicated by the fact that the mtDNA data are based on pairwise distances, whereas the ITS data are discrete. Practical implications of the results for shiitake breeding and conservation are discussed.
S215	J. B. Morton	1995	Taxonomic and phylogenetic divergence among five Scutellospora species based on comparative developmental sequences	Mycologia	87	1	127-137		http://www.jstor.org/stable/3760955	arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi; Scutellospora coralloidea; S. fulgida; S. gregaria; S. persica; S. verrucosa; systematics	Morphological characters synthesized from differentiation of mycorrhizae and spores were defined developmentally ancl their stability examined among eight organisms of five Scutellospora species (Glomales, Zygomycetes). Morphology and architecture of fungal hyphae at entry points in Sudan-grass roots were similar to that observed in other Scutellospora species. Surface topology of extraradical auxiliary cell were similar among the taxa studied, and intermediate between that of Gigaspora and other Scutellospora species. Spore differentiation was partitioned into four discrete stages: differentiation of layers in the spore wall (stages 1 and 2), subsequent formation of a bilayered flexible inner wall (stage 3), and lastly, the synthesis of a germination shield (stage 4). Spore growth (expansion) was coupled only with stages 1 and 2. Stages of differentiation could be homologized among taxa because of their division and stability in ontogenesis. Stage 3 was shared by all five Scutellospora species, thus uniting them, together with S. castanea, in a monophyletic group. Species-level divergence in this group was expressed only in properties of spore wall layers. Stages 1-3 were homologous with the first three of five stages in differentiation of S. heterogama spores. These shared stages suggest a pattern of Haecklian recapitulation in the evolution of flexible inner walls and both a historical and a contemporaneous link between all flexible inner walls and germination events. Thus, developmentally defined morphological characters provide a causal linkage between the taxonomic hierarchy and a hierarchy in evolution of spore subcellular structure and also suggest causal relationships between form and function.
S219	R. S. Surve-Iyer;G. G. Adams;A. F. Iezzoni;A. L. Jones	1995	Isozyme detection and variation in Leucostoma species from Prunus and Malus	Mycologia	87	4	471-482		http://www.jstor.org/stable/3760764	allozymes; cultural morphology; Cytospora; genetic variation; Leucocytospora; population genetics; speciation; subspecific groups; temperature; Valsa; virulence	Isozyme analysis was used to study the variation among isolates of Leucostoma causing canker on fruit trees. Seventy-seven isolates including 17 from teleomorphs were obtained from six Prunus species and Malus domestica in North America. Thirty-one alleles were resolved at eight putative loci and the distance and maximum parsimony methods of analysis found the two species of Leucostoma, L. persoonii and L. cincta, to be distinct. The two species had no similarity as measured by the coefficient of Jaccard. Parsimony analysis separated the species into two clades with a basal branch supported by 99.8% of the bootstrapped data sets. Fifty six isolates of Leucostoma clustered into six phenetic groups. Isolates corresponding to L. persoonii were clustered into three distinct groups, PG1, PG2, and PG3. Those corresponding to L. cincta were clustered into two similar groups on Prunus spp., PG4 and PG5, and a third group on Malus, PG6. Isozyme polymorphism was low within each of the three phenetic groups of L. persoonii, including PG1 that was geographically widespread on many host species. PG1 was distinct in culture morphology, having a lobate colony margin. Polymorphism was low within L. cincta PG6 on Malus but high within PG4 found on Prunus spp. Isolates from Malus were distinct in cultural characteristics and clustered in a separate branch from the other members of the L. cincta clade in 89% of the bootstrap trees. Leucostoma persoonii isolates were all able to grow at 33 C, a temperature at which growth ceased in L. cincta isolates. Isozyme polymorphism was evident among seven ascospore progeny of an L. cincta perithecium from Prunus, resolving the segregation of alleles during meiosis. Polymorphism was not evident among ascospore progeny or among 13 vegetative compatibility groups of L. persoonii. Two phenetic groups of L. persoonii and two of L. cincta were evaluated for relative virulence on inoculated peach trees. Each group contained some isolates of high virulence, except PG6 of L. cincta from Malus.
S222	L. Tibell	1995	The anamorph of Chaenothecopsis debilis	Mycologia	87	2	245-252		http://www.jstor.org/stable/3760910	anamorphs; cladistic analysis; Chaenothecopsis; Chaenothecopsis debilis; systematics	The anamorph of Chaenothecopsis debilis is coelomycetous. The wall of the conidiomata consists of several layers. The conidia are nonpigmented, sickle-shaped and formed from conidiogenous cells forming part of the conidioma wall. This anamorph is compared to anamorphs of other Chaenothecopsis species. In a cladistic analysis the distribution of different type of anamorphs in Chaenothecopsis are mapped. Hyphomycetous anamorphs from cultures are reported for the first time in Chaenothecopsis pusilla, C. pusiola and C. tasmanica.
S224	K. A. Zeller	1995	Phylogenetic relatedness within the genus Erysiphe estimated with morphological characteristics	Mycologia	87	4	525-531		http://www.jstor.org/stable/3760771	Erysiphaceae; Erysiphales; Erysiphe; morphology; powdery mildews; systematics; taxonomy	The genus Erysiphe has been suggested as an ancestral form within the Erysiphaceae characterized by a set of shared, relatively primitive morphological characters and may in fact be polyphyletic. However, several groups within Erysiphe are delimited by other sets of important morphological differences, resulting in its subdivision into at least three evolutionary lines (sections) and other allied genera. Further subdivision of e –ion into species has been suggested on the basis of more subtle morphological differentiation as well as by host range differences. While morphology can delimit taxa within Erysiphe, the use of morphology in estimating phylogenetic relatedness within and between sections has not been tested directly. In this analysis, a direct comparison of differences within Erysiphe and among allied taxa was undertaken to determine the phylogenetic utility of these morphological differences. Cladistic analysis revealed a most parsimonious consensus network that separates Blumeria from the remaining Erysiphe taxa, and groups species from section Colvinomyces into a single clade with Brasiliomyces. Sphaerotheca and Microsphaera form distinct clades. The strict consensus fails to clearly order relationships among sections Erysiphe, Caleopsidis and Colvinomyces. Bootstrap analyses suggest that section Caleopsidis is more closely aligned with section Erysiphe, and that Microsphaera and section Erysiphe share common ancestry. Phylogenetic relationships within section Colvinomyces and of Brasiliomyces trina are not clarified by morphology. Thus, morphology does show some usefulness in phylogenetic comparisons between sections of Erysiphe, but appears to have much more limited usefulness for distinguishing among species within a section.
S9x6x96c10c33c05	F. A. Harrington;D. Potter	1997	Phylogenetic relationships within Sarcoscypha based upon nucleotide sequences of the internal transcribed spacer of nuclear ribosomal DNA	Mycologia	89	2	258-267		http://www.jstor.org/stable/3761080	cladistics; ITS; Pezizales; phylogeny; Sarcoscyphaceae	Nucleotide sequences of the internal transcribed spacer (ITS) region of nuclear ribosomal DNA (including the 5.8S ribosomal RNA gene and the flanking ITS1 and ITS2 regions) were used as characters in a phylogenetic analysis of species of Sarcoscypha. The sequences of the ITS regions for 25 isolates, representing fourteen (nine described and five putative new) species of Sarcoscypha, and three outgroup species, Pithya vulgaris, P. cupressina, and Phillipsia domingensis, were determined in both directions using primers ITS1, ITS2, ITS3, and ITS4. The complete sequences ranged from 485 to 764 base pairs in length; they were aligned using the program MALIGN. The sequence of Phillipsia domingensis was highly divergent from that of the other taxa; the alignment was therefore repeated excluding that taxon and subsequent phylogenetic analyses included only the species of Sarcoscypha and one outgroup, Pithya cupressina. The complete alignment contained 907 base pair sites; 446 of these were considered ambiguously aligned and were excluded from phylogenetic analyses. Of the remaining 461 base pair sites, 91 were variable with 43 potentially informative characters. Cladistic analysis yielded two equally parsimonious cladograms with NONA (these corresponded to two fully supported trees of the eight trees found by Hennig86). In all most parsimonious trees, two Asian species, S. striatispora and S. vassiljevae, fell outside of a core group of twelve species which were grouped in two major clades, each including taxa from North America, Europe and Asia. One clade included the following species: S. austriaca, S. coccinea, S. macaronesica, and two putative new species. This clade was divided into two subclades: one consisted of S. macaronesica and S. coccinea, while, in the second, one putative new species from Japan (sp. A) was sister to a polytomy including the putative new species from Taiwan (sp. B) and the S. austriaca isolates from Europe and North America. The other major clade included S. dudleyi and S. emarginata, whose positions varied among the equally parsimonious trees, and a subclade in which the second new species from Japan (sp. D) was sister to a polytomy of S. occidentalis, an isolate of S. javensis,and two putative new species (sp. E from China and sp. C from Hawaii). In all cases where more than one isolate of the same species was included, those isolates grouped together within each clade, although relationships among the three isolates of S. austriaca and the one of S. sp. B were unresolved. A new combination is made for Peziza emarginata Berk. & Broome.
S239	W. Gams;W. Meyer	1998	What exactly is Trichoderma harzianum?	Mycologia	90	5	904-915		http://www.jstor.org/stable/3761332	biological control; morphology; mushroom pathogen; T. atroviride; systematics; typification	Trichoderma harzianum is neotypified by an isolate from the type locality, and this neotype is fully described. It is compared with original herbarium specimens and recent isolates of T. atroviride P. Karsten, one of which is designated as epitype. RFLP analyses of the internal transcribed spacer (ITS) region of the rDNA gene cluster, and sequence analysis of the ITS1 region were used to group these and other isolates received as T. harzianum. Two major groups were found. The first group, the T. harzianum complex, comprises the neotype and other isolates from the type locality, Okuda group 2 isolates, Muthumeenakshi group Th1 mushroom isolates, some isolates used in biological control, the ex-type culture of T. inhamatum, and the aggressive mushroom competitor the Muthumeenakshi group Th2. The latter forms a distinct subgroup of group 1 on the basis of unique RFLP and ITS1 sequence types (six base pairs different); it will be taxonomically distinguished from T. harzianum in a forthcoming paper. The name T. harzianum requires conservation because of the existence of two obscure older names for the same taxon, the ex-type cultures of which fall also in the first group. The second group, the T. viride-T. atroviride complex, comprises Okuda group 1 and Muthumeenakshi group Th3 isolates.
S3x21x98c10c02c04	N. Hallenberg;E. Parmasto	1998	Phylogenetic studies in species of Corticiaceae growing on branches	Mycologia	90	4	640-654		http://www.jstor.org/stable/3761223	Acanthophysium; Aleurocystidiellum; Aleurodiscus; Aphyllophorales; Stereum; Basidiomycota; phylogeny; 25S ribosomal DNA	Parsimony analysis based on ribosomal DNA sequence and morphological data was performed for 28 species of Acanthophysium, Amylostereum, Aleurodiscus, Corticium, Cytidia, Dendrocorticium, Duportella, Peniophora, Stereum, and Vuilleminia (Corticiaceae, Basidiomycota). Sequence data from a portion of the ribosomal large subunit (nDNA) and morphological data were analyzed separately as well as in combination. Three monophyletic groups were clearly distinguished: Peniophora spp., Aleurocystidiellum spp., Acanthophysium + Stereum spp. Characters used for delimitation of Aleurodiscus s.l. are discussed.
S330	S. Hambleton;K. N. Egger;R. S. Currah	1998	The genus Oidiodendron: species delimitation and phylogenetic relationships based on nuclear ribosomal DNA analysis	Mycologia	90	5	854-869		http://www.jstor.org/stable/3761327	ascomycetes; ericoid mycorrhiza; molecular systematics; Myxotrichaceae; Onygenales	Nuclear ribosomal DNA sequences (ITS region) of fifteen species in the hyphomycete genus Oidiodendron and ten species from the 4 genera in the Myxotrichaceae, Byssoascus, Gymnostellatospora, Myxotrichum, and Pseudogymnoascus, were analysed to: (i) reveal the levels of intra- versus interspecific sequence variation within the genus Oidiodendron, clarify species delimitation and examine the usefulness of some morphological characters used for identification; (ii) assess the possible conspecificity of documented ericoid mycorrhizal strains of Oidiodendron; and (iii) test the hypothesis based on morphological inference that the genus Oidiodendron belongs with the genus Myxotrichum in the Myxotrichaceae (Onygenales). Comparison of molecular and morphological data for multiple strains of O. griseum, O. tenuissimum and O. maius revealed that conidiophore length and the production of a diffusing pigment are not reliable key characters for the genus. Several historically important ericoid mycorrhizal strains, documented as O. griseum, were re-identified as O. maius. Parsimony analyses of 23 Oidiodendron strains showed that three highly supported monophyletic groups, each one consisting of a pair of species, are resolved within the genus. A low level of sequence divergence between the species in these pairs suggests conspecificity for each pair. Other interspecific relationships were not well-supported by bootstrap values. Parsimony analysis of a second dataset composed of mitotic and meiotic taxa showed that Oidiodendron, Myxotrichum and Byssoascus form a well-supported monophyletic group within the Myxotrichaceae, and that this group has diverged significantly from the two other genera in the family. Relationships in the monophyletic group were correlated with anamorph state produced; three Myxotrichum spp., and B. striatosporus, all with distinct or reported Oidiodendron states, nested with anamorphic species, while species of Myxotrichum with other anamorph states were excluded. In addition, sequence divergence measures between the meiotic and mitotic species clustered in two monophyletic clades were found to be comparable to the intraspecific levels for Oidiodendron spp. These results support the initial hypothesis that Oidiodendron is closely related phylogenetically to the genus Myxotrichum and suggest that the generic concept of Byssoascus needs re-examination.
S4x10x98c11c15c13	B. A. Roy;D. R. Vogler;T. D. Bruns;T. M. Szaro	1998	Cryptic Species in the Puccinia monoica complex	Mycologia	90	5	846-853		http://www.jstor.org/stable/3761326	Arabis; mimicry; molecular phylogeny; Puccinia thlaspeos; rust fungi; Tranzschel's Law	The Puccinia monoica complex is an enigmatic group of rust fungi. They are flower mimics, and they greatly reduce host reproduction and survival. They are relatively common, attacking approximately 960 species in 11 genera of crucifers as well as at least five genera of grasses. In modern taxonomic treatments the Puccinia monoica complex is treated as four species that are differentiated by the number of spore states in their life cycles. However, other systematic treatments have divided the group into species or forms based on host association. Within the species based on spore state there is morphological variation, but it has not been readily assignable to either host species or geographic area. We used DNA sequencing and phylogenetic analysis to determine whether there are cryptic species in this group that are not evident when only morphology is used. We sequenced the nuclear rDNA region containing the internal transcribed spacers (ITS-1+5.8S gene + ITS-2) of isolates from different hosts. Our results indicate that there are cryptic species in the Puccinia monoica complex, and that species in this group cannot be identified strictly by life cycle stage.
S3x5x98c11c50c27	D. R. Vogler;T. D. Bruns	1998	Phylogenetic relationships among the pine stem rust fungi (Cronartium and Peridermium spp.)	Mycologia	90	2	244-257		http://www.jstor.org/stable/3761300	DNA sequence analysis; isozyme analysis; Urediniomycetes	Species in Cronartium and its anamorphic genus Peridermium form a morphologically homogeneous group of rust fungi that infect stems, branches, and cones of Pinus species in North and Central America, Asia, and Europe. Several species are important forest pathogens, causing severe economic and aesthetic damage to pines in forests and parks throughout the northern hemisphere. Morphological characters have been used to distinguish among these rust fungi, but have proven inadequate for assessing phylogenetic relationships within the group. In this study, we extracted fungal DNA from spores and infected host tissue representing collections of all major North American and Eurasian Cronartium and Peridermium species and of two related rust genera, Chrysomyxa and Pucciniastrum. Using the polymerase chain reaction, we amplified and sequenced the internal transcribed spacer region from the nuclear ribosomal RNA genes, aligned sequences for all taxa, and generated phylogenetic trees using parsimony and neighbor-joining techniques. Parsimony analysis yielded a strict consensus of 24 trees that is congruent with the single tree generated by neighbor-joining analysis. Neighbor-joining was also used to compare trees derived from nucleotide sequences and from isozyme phenotype data from an earlier study; in general, the same species groups were supported in both data sets. Our analyses indicate that the pine stem rust fungi form distinct clades that correlate with telial host families (e.g., Fagaceae and Santalaceae). Close phylogenetic relationships between autoecious, short- cycled Peridermium species and putative heteroecious relatives were confirmed (e.g., P. harknessii with C. quercuum f. sp. banksianae, and P. bethelii with C. comandrae). Nucleotide sequences and isozyme phenotypes were used to identify four undescribed taxa, including: California oak rust, which may be a cone or gall rust that has become isolated from its aecial host; white-spored gall rust from the southwestern U.S., which was thought to be an albino form of orange-spored P. harknessii; a previously undescribed yellow-spored gall rust from California; and stalactiform limb rust of Jeffrey pine, which was thought to be a host-form of C. coleosporioides. In light of these results, a systematic reevaluation of Cronartium and Peridermium morphology and biology is needed.
S221	K. Winka;O. E. Eriksson;A. Bang	1998	Molecular evidence for recognizing the Chaetothyriales	Mycologia	90	5	823-831		http://www.jstor.org/stable/3761324	Ascomycota; Coccodiniaceae; Dothideales; evolution; phylogeny; ribosomal RNA	The 18S rRNA gene sequences from the bitunicate ascomycetes Ceramothyrium linnaeae (Chaetothyriaceae) and Coccodinium bartschii (Coccodiniaceae) were determined and aligned with the corresponding sequences from 33 other ascomycetes and one basidiomycete, Boletus satanas. Phylogenetic analyses of these sequences supported previous reports that the Herpotrichiellaceae (Capronia, black yeasts, etc.) are distant from Dothideales and Pleosporales. A new sequence of Ceramothyrium linnaeae, representing the family Chaetothyriaceae, is monophyletic with representatives of the Herpotrichiellaceae, suggesting that both families can be accommodated in the order Chaetothyriales. The concept of Chaetothyriales can not be based on the presence of periphysoids, since Coccodinium bartschii, which also has periphysoids, clustered with members of the Dothideaceae. The Chaetothyriales are not closely related to other bitunicates, but are the sister group of either Eurotiales or Lecanorales/ Peltigerales.
S356	T. Aoki;K. O'Donnell	1999	Morphological and molecular characterization of Fusarium pseudograminearum sp. nov., formerly recognized as the group 1 population of F. graminearum	Mycologia	1999	4	597-609		http://www.jstor.org/stable/3761245	ß-tubulin; crown rot; DNA sequence; head scab; morphology; mycotoxigenic; systematics; translation elongation factor	Fusarium pseudograminearum sp. nov., formally known as F. graminearum group 1, is described and illustrated. Fusarium pseudograminearum can be distinguished from F. graminearum based on difference in colony growth rates, region of conidia with greatest width, different reactions to black-light-blue light concerning the length of 3- and 5-septate conidia, and absence of homothallic production of perithecia. Maximum parsimony analysis of DNA sequences from the beta-tubulin gene introns and exons indicate that F. pseudograminearum represents a phylogenetically distinct species that is a sister group to a F. graminearum-F. lunulosporum-F. culmorum clade. DNA sequence data from the translation elongation factor (EF-1 alpha) gene were used to develop a polymerase chain reaction primer pair which specifically amplified DNA from all isolates of Fusarium pseudograminearum tested.
S378	M. L. Berbee;M. Pirseyedi;S. Hubbard	1999	Cochliobolus phylogenetics and the origin of known, highly virulent pathogens, inferred from ITS and glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase gene sequences	Mycologia	91	6	964-977		http://www.jstor.org/stable/3761627	Ascomycota; Bipolaris; Curvularia; evolution; molecular phylogenetics; Pleosporaceae; Pseudocochliobolus	We evaluate the phylogenetic origin of highly virulent plant pathogens in the genus Cochliobolus (sexually reproducing species in the Ascomycota, Pleosporaceae) and assess the relationship between Cochliobolus species and species of Curvularia and Bipolaris (asexual states of fungi in the Ascomycota, Pleosporaceae). To infer a phylogeny, we have used two sequence regions: (i) the complete ITS 1, ITS 2, and 5.8S rDNA sequences for 65 fungal isolates and (ii) a 600 bp fragment of the housekeeping gene gpd, coding for glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase, for 54 isolates. We combined ITS, 5.8S and gpd sequence data from 41 species. In the Cochliobolus clade, 31 out of 32 species fit clearly into one of two groups. One species, Cochliobolus homomorphus, did not fit clearly into either group. The 13 species in Cochliobolus Group 1 grouped together with 100% bootstrap support from the combined ITS/gpd data. This group included Cochliobolus and Bipolaris species that cause serious crop losses, such as C. sativus, C. miyabeanus, C. carbonum and C. heterostrophus. However, within Group 1, the economically serious pathogens did not form a monophyletic group of species. Average substitution levels between pairs of species in the pathogen group were low, about 1.7% in the ITS region, suggesting that these species had radiated rapidly and recently. The 18 species in Cochliobolus Group 2 formed a monophyletic group in 96% of parsimony bootstrap replicates of the combined ITS and gpd data. The Cochliobolus species that Tsuda transferred into the segregate genus Pseudocochliobolus were in this second group. This study included 9 Curvularia and Bipolaris species without known sexual states and they all appear to be recently derived from among sexual species of Cochliobolus. Both Curvularia and Bipolaris were polyphyletic, but only Bipolaris states were associated with Group 1 Cochliobolus species. Both Curvularia and Bipolaris states were associated with species in Cochliobolus Group 2.
S259	W. Chen;C. A. Shearer;J. L. Crane	1999	Phylogeny of Ophioceras spp. based on morphological and molecular data	Mycologia	91	1	145-156		http://www.jstor.org/stable/3761195	Ascomycetes; Ophiostomatales; Halosphaeriales; systematics; aquatic; rDNA sequences	Collections from freshwater habitats of undescribed pyrenomycetes with scolecosporous ascospores were characterized using morphological characters, restriction analysis of PCR amplified rDNAs, and 18S rDNA sequences. Five species of Ophioceras were resolved and one species was excluded from the genus. Based on phylogenetic analysis of partial 18S rDNA sequences, species of Pseudohalonectria form a sister clade to Ophioceras thereby supporting the integrity but close relationship of these two freshwater genera. Gaeumannomyces graminis falls within the Ophioceras/Pseudohalonectria clade and is a sister taxon to a species of Ophioceras. This calls to question the reliability of the morphological and biological characters currently used to separate Gaeumannomyces from Ophioceras. In parsimony analyses, Ophioceras and Pseudohalonectria are more closely related to two species in the Ophiostomatales than to species in the Sordariales or Diaporthales. However, such a relationship is not evident in analyses.
S360	D. Drehmel;R. Vilgalys;J. M. Moncalvo	1999	Molecular phylogeny of Amanita based on large-subunit ribosomal DNA sequences: implications for taxonomy and character evolution	Mycologia	91	4	610-618		http://www.jstor.org/stable/3761246	Amidellae; Caesareae; classification; Lepidella; Mappae; morphology; mushroom; nucLSU; Ovigerae; Phalloideae; rDNA; Vaginatae; Validae	Phylogenetic relationships in the genus Amanita were investigated using sequence data from the nuclear-encoded large subunit ribosomal DNA. Exemplar taxa were selected to represent the all sections from the current classifications of Singer, Bas and Jenkins. Phylogenetic analysis of the nuc-LSU region supports the taxonomic distinction of subgenera Amanita and Lepidella, as well as all nine sections previously recognized by Singer (1986) including sections Amanita, Amidellae, Caesareae, Lepidella, Mappae, Phalloideae, Ovigerae, Vaginatae ,Validae. Phylogenetic analyses among these nine terminal groups reveal several higher-level relationships which are also supported by morphological and biochemical characters. A phylogenetic classification is proposed which recognizes two subgenera (Amanita, Lepidella), four sections (Amanita, Vaginate, Phalloideae, Lepidella), seven subsections (Amanita, Ovigerae, Amidellae, Caesareae, Phalloideae, Vaginatae, Validae), and two series (Mappae, Validae).
S695	D. F. Farr;L. A. Castlebury;R. A. Pardo-Schultheiss	1999	Phomopsis amygdali causes peach shoot blight of cultivated peach trees in the southeastern United States	Mycologia	91	6	1008-1015		http://www.jstor.org/stable/3761632	almond; asian pear; Diaporthe; plum; Prunus; Pyrus 	Phomopsis shoot blight of peach is an increasingly common fungal disease in southeastern peach growing areas of the United States. A similar disease has been reported from Europe where it occurs on both peach and almond. Strains of Phomopsis were obtained from peach, asian pear and plum in the United States and from almond in Spain and Italy. Examination of the morphological, cultural and molecular characteristics of these strains showed that the Phomopsis amygdali on almond in Europe is the same as the fungus found on peach in the US. The species of Phomopsis on plum and asian pear in the United States is different from P. amygdal.
S354	F. A. Fernandez;F. M. Lutzoni;S. M. Huhndorf	1999	Teleomorph-anamorph connections: the new pyrenomycetous genus Carpoligna and its Pleurothecium anamorph	Mycologia	91	2	251-262		http://www.jstor.org/stable/3761370	Cacumisporium; Chaetosphaeria; ITS; large subunit nrDNA; Hypocreales; Lasiosphaeriaceae; Magnaporthaceae; Microascales; Sordariales; systematics	Several collections of a pyrenomycete identified as Chaetosphaeria were made from decorticated wood of twigs and branches in Costa Rica, Panama, Puerto Rico and continental USA. Discrete and continuous characters of the ascomata, asci and ascospores in these collections show that they are very similar morphologically and represent populations of the same species. However, culturing of single ascospore isolates from these collections yielded an anamorph unlike the typical phialidic anamorphs of Chaetosphaeria. This anamorph fits the description of Pleurothecium recurvatum (Morgan) von Hˆhnel, for which a teleomorph connection has not been yet established. Sequences of the ITS region of the nuclear ribosomal DNA of three collections from Costa Rica, Puerto Rico and USA were compared and found to be 98% similar. Parsimony and maximum likelihood analyses of sequences of the large subunit nuclear-encoded ribosomal DNA from representative taxa of eight ascomycetous orders show this ascomycete as a monophyletic group distinct from Chaetosphaeria. Statistical analyses of hypothetical trees based on the most parsimonious and the most likely trees rule out phylogenetic affinities of this pyrenomycete to Chaetosphaeria. These analyses suggest possible affinities to the Hypocreales and/or the Microascales. Morphology of the anamorph and analyses of ribosomal DNA sequence data warrant the creation of the new genus Carpoligna to accommodate this pyrenomycete. The implications of the phylogenetic relationships of Carpoligna in the practical identification of morphologically similar pyrenomycetes are discussed.
S226	W. Gams;M. Klamer;K. O'Donnell	1999	Fusarium miscanthi sp. nov. from Miscanthus Litter	Mycologia	91	2	263-268		http://www.jstor.org/stable/3761371	Gibberella; litter bag; morphology; new species; phylogeny; rDNA	Fusarium miscanthi sp. nov. was isolated from straw of Japanese plume grass, Miscanthus sinensis, buried in a Danish soil. It is characterized by long chains of microconidia which can be either pyriform or fusiform and are produced on polyphialides. Perithecia were not obtained in mating experiments. A strongly supported F. miscanthi-F. nisikadoi clade forms a putative sister-group to the Fusarium oxysporum complex. These two clades form a strongly supported sister-group to the Gibberella fujikuroi complex. Introduction of F. miscanthi into Denmark from Asia together with the grass seems plausible.
S400	D. S. Gernandt;J. K. Stone	1999	Phylogenetic analysis of nuclear ribosomal DNA places the nematode parasite, Drechmeria coniospora, in Clavicipitaceae	Mycologia	91	6	993-1000		http://www.jstor.org/stable/3761630	anamorph; internal transcribed spacer region; Meria; mitosporic fungi; phialides; Rhabdocline; small subunit nrDNA	The nematode endoparasite, Drechmeria coniospora, was originally described by Drechsler and placed in the hyphomycete form genus Meria, together with Meria laricis, a foliar parasite of Larix (Pinaceae). Although both species produce 1-celled hyaline conidia from serial phialides on hyphal conidiomata, the new genus Drechmeria was proposed subsequently to accommodate the nematode parasite based on pure culture studies, ecological differences, and having integrated phialides compared to the mainly discrete phialides of M. laricis. Morphological characteristics and phylogenetic analysis of nuclear ribosomal DNA (nrDNA) support the affinity of Meria laricis to the inoperculate discomycete genus of foliar parasites, Rhabdocline. Small subunit and ITS region sequences from nrDNA were determined from an accession of D. coniospora that continued to produce diagnostic features in culture. BLAST comparisons of the sequences to nucleotide databases revealed high similarities to accessions from the perithecial ascomycete order Hypocreales. Separate phylogenetic analyses were conducted using ITS region sequences from Hypocrealean species and partial sequences from the small subunit of species representing perithecial ascomycetes and inoperculate discomycetes. Analyses placed Drechmeria in the hypocrealean family, Clavicipitaceae. Drechmeria coniospora shares the ecological strategy of animal parasitism also exhibited by some members of Clavicipitaceae. These findings support the separation of the anamorphic fungi Drechmeria and Meria into distinct genera and indicate that there is no close phylogenetic relationship between them.
S353	K. Hansen;D. H. Pfister;D. S. Hibbett	1999	Phylogenetic relationships among species of Phillipsia inferred from molecular and morphological data	Mycologia	91	2	299-314		http://www.jstor.org/stable/3761375	ITS; Pezizales; Sarcoscyphaceae; SEM; spore ornamentation	The internal transcribed spacers (ITS) of the nuclear ribosomal DNA have been sequenced from 29 collections of Phillipsia, mainly from the New World. The P. domingensis complex, collections with a range of colors but otherwise referable to P. domingensis s.l. based on spore ornamentation, were studied. Three distinctive species of Phillipsia also were included. The sequences were analysed to infer phylogenetic relationships within Phillipsia, using parsimony. Morphological features were studied separately, and then evaluated in the context of the ITS phylogeny. Four distinct rDNA lineages, supported by ascospore ornamentation, were identified: the P. crispata, the P. domingensis, the P. olivacea and the P. carnicolor lineages. SEM photographs of the ascospores are presented. Phillipsia lutea and another yellow form were nested within the P. domingensis complex, of those with reddish hymenial colors. Color has been emphasized in taxonomy of Phillipsia, but these results suggest that individuals with strikingly different coloration may be closely related. Levels of ITS sequence divergence in the P. domingensis lineage were low. Based on these data, and morphology as studied thus far, there is no justification for recognizing segregate species within the P. domingensis complex. The Old World collections of the P. domingensis complex were nested within the New World collections, which implies that the P. domingensis lineage is geographically widespread. Phillipsia rugospora is placed in synonymy with P. olivacea and a detailed description of this taxon is given. A lectotype is designated for P. olivacea. Key Words: ITS, Pezizales, Sarcoscyphaceae, SEM, spore ornamentation.
S436	K. W. Hughes;L. L. McGhee;A. S. Methven;J. E. Johnson;R. H. Petersen	1999	Patterns of geographic speciation in the genus Flammulina based on sequences of the ribosomal ITS1-5.8S-ITS2 area	Mycologia	91	6	978-986		http://www.jstor.org/stable/3761628	Agaricales; biogeography; DNA; enoki-take; fungi; Tricholomataceae; vicariance; winter mushroom	Previous studies based on morphology and on ability to intercross suggested that new biological and morphological species were sheltered within the genus Flammulina as well as varieties within F. velutipes. The currently described or proposed Northern Hemisphere Flammulina species are F. mexicana, F. populicola, F. rossica, F. ononidis, F. elastica, F. fennae and F. velutipes. Within F. velutipes are F. velutipes var. velutipes, var. lupinicola, and var. lactea. The ribosomal ITS1-5.8S-ITS2 region was sequenced for eighteen geographically diverse Flammulina collections, including the three F. velutipes varieties. Results of Neighbor Joining and Parsimony analysis produced five distinct Northern Hemisphere clades, a clade consisting of F. velutipes together with it's varieties, a clade consisting of F. populicola and F. mexicana, and clades representing F. fennae, F. rossica and F. elastica together with F. ononidis. Data are consistent with the hypothesis that F. populicola is a relatively old species which has diverged significantly on different continents, possibly giving rise to F. mexicana in North America. The ITS sequence for Flammulina stratosa, an isolate from New Zealand, is highly divergent from all other Flammulina isolates and may represent an ancient endemic or the product of very rapid evolution. Species diversity is highest in Europe and suggests that Europe may be a center of diversity for this group.
S372	J. Johnson	1999	Phylogenetic relationships within Lepiota sensu lato based on morphological and molecular data	Mycologia	91	3	443-458		http://www.jstor.org/stable/3761345	Agaricaceae; Agaricales; morphology; phylogeny; rDNA; systematics	Current classifications of the light-spored agaric genus Lepiota s. l. (Agaricaceae, Agaricales) were evaluated using parsimony analyses of morphological and molecular characters. Thirty-eight morphological characters were studied using macroscopic, microscopic, and biochemical analysis of fruit-body, basidiospores, and vegetative cultures. These characters were used in parsimony analysis of 25 species within Lepiota s. l., which represent a broad sampling within the six key segregate genera recognized by Singer: Lepiota s. s., Cystolepiota, Leucocoprinus, Leucoagaricus, Macrolepiota, and Chlorophyllum. In addition, five other members of the Agaricales were evaluated from Agaricus, Cystoderma, and Ripartitella, as well as two dark-spored allies from Coprinus section Comati and a dark-spored secotioid relative. Additional outgroups were used to evaluate the root of the phylogeny. Morphology-based analyses support the use of the Lepiota segregate genera recognized by Singer that are included in the tribes Lepioteae and Leucocoprineae, with two exceptions: Lepiota section Echinatae is in a clade with Cystolepiota, and Leucoagaricus appears paraphyletic. Molecule-based analyses using both nuclear and mitochondrial rDNA data provide less resolution but support the transfer of Lepiota section Echinatae to Cystolepiota and a paraphyletic Leucoagaricus, as well as a distinct Chlorophyllum.
S381	T. Kurkela;M. Hanso	1999	Differentiating characteristics between Melampsoridium rusts infecting birch and alder leaves	Mycologia	91	6	987-992		http://www.jstor.org/stable/3761629	5.8S rDNA; Alnus; Betula; DGGE; ITS; Uredinales; urediniospore	Melampsoridium rust epidemics on alder occurred in Estonia in 1996-1998, and in Finland in 1997-1998. In this study we show that the length and roundness of urediniospores and the PCR-amplified internal transcribed spacer (ITS) sequences of rusts occurring on Alnus and Betula are different. Morphologically the rust on alder is like M. hiratsukanum, and based on our results is not conspecific with M. betulinum. The sequence comparisons indicated that 5.8 S rDNA was similar in both Melampsoridium species and identical to several Cronartium sequences. The 5.8S rDNA of Melampsoridium was also more similar to Pucciniastrum, Chrysomyxa and Puccinia than to Melampsora species. The ITS sequences were distinct from all other rusts, but relatively similar to Cronartium, Pucciniastrum and Chrysomyxa sequences.
S335	S. Lee;R. T. Hanlin	1999	Phylogenetic relationships of Chaetomium and similar genera based on ribosomal DNA sequences	Mycologia	91	3	434-442		http://www.jstor.org/stable/3761344	Achaetomium; Ascomycota; Ascotricha; Chaetomiaceae; Coniochaeta; Emericella nidulans; Eurotium rubrum; Kernia, Lophotrichus; Microascales; Petriella, pyrenomycetes; Sordaria; Sordariales; Thielavia; Xylariales	The thirty taxa sampled for this study were chosen based on their taxonomic position or particular morphological characters, which are related to those of Chaetomium. The fifteen fungal isolates sequenced herein were obtained during a fungal biodiversity survey of tropical soils or from the collections of R. T. Hanlin. Fifteen species were selected from the published data. The aligned sequences of the 5*portion of the 18S ribosomal DNA were analyzed to infer the phylogenetic relationships among Chaetomium and related genera. The sequence data confirmed the generic entity of Achaetomium and placed Ascotricha within the Xylariaceae. The analyses also defined the monophyletic lineage of the Microascaceae and the evolutionary linkages between the families Sordariaceae and Chaetomiaceae. The placement of Coniochaeta in the Coniochaetaceae and Chaetomium and Achaetomium in the Chaetomiaceae, under the order Sordariales, is supported by this study.
S369	A. D. Mitchell;A. Bresinsky	1999	Phylogenetic relationships of Agaricus species based on ITS-2 and 28S ribosomal DNA sequences	Mycologia	91	5	811-819		http://www.jstor.org/stable/3761534	Agaricaceae; Agariceae; molecular systematics; rDNA	Parsimony and maximum likelihood analyses of sequence data from the internal transcribed spacer (ITS-2) region plus a portion of the 28S gene are used to study the phylogenetic relationships of Agaricus species. The ingroup contained 16 Agaricus species, selected from the range of sections contained in the subgenus Agaricus. A total of eight outgroups were chosen from the Agaricaceae and phylogenetic trees rooted on Stropharia coronilla. Results suggest that Agaricus may be monophyletic, but further tests should include taxa from the subgenera Langagaricus and Conioagaricus. Two well-supported clades were found. The Agaricus clade contained A. subperonatus, A. devoniensis, A. bisporus, A. spissicaulis, A. bitorquis, and A. impudicus. Results suggest that A. bernardii may be closely related to this group. The Arvenses clade contained A. silvicola, A. arvensis, A. abruptibulbus, and A. semotus. A possible sister group to the Arvenses clade includes A. lanipes and A. maskae. Relationships for A. campestris, A. silvaticus and A. xanthoderma remain unclear, although it is likely these species diverged early compared with the other Agaricus species studied. Phylogenetic hypotheses are given for taxa that have been difficult to classify based on other forms of data, including the placement of A. spissicaulis with A. bisporus; A. lanipes with A. maskae; and Melanophyllum haematospermum with Leucoagaricus naucinus.
S306	H. Myburg;B. D. Wingfield;M. J. Wingfield	1999	Phylogeny of Cryphonectria cubensis and allied species inferred from DNA analysis	Mycologia	91	2	243-250		http://www.jstor.org/stable/3761369	Cryphonectria parasitica; Endothia eugeniae; Endothia gyrosa; Eucalyptus; RFLPs; ribosomal RNA	Cryphonectria cubensis causes a serious canker disease of Eucalyptus in many tropical areas of the world. The aim of this study was to determine the phylogenetic relationships among strains of C. cubensis and the related species C. parasitica, Endothia eugeniae and E. gyrosa using DNA sequence data. A second objective was to develop a rapid diagnostic method to distinguish among these taxa. The variable ITS1 and ITS2 regions, as well as the conserved 5.8S gene of the rRNA operon, were amplified and sequenced. The amplified PCR products were also used in Alu I and Cfo I restriction digests. Analysis of the restriction profiles indicate that it is possible to distinguish between C. cubensis, C. parasitica, E. eugeniae and E. gyrosa using RFLPs (restriction fragment length polymorphisms). This will facilitate the identification of isolates thought to represent C. cubensis that sporulate poorly in culture. Analysis of the sequence data showed that C. cubensis isolates form a distinct clade that includes a strain from clove that might otherwise have been assigned the name E. eugeniae. Isolates of C. parasitica formed a separate clade. Endothia gyrosa grouped separately from both C. cubensis and C. parasitica. Key Words: Cryphonectria parasitica, Endothia eugeniae, Endothia gyrosa, Eucalyptus, RFLPs, Ribosomal RNA
S380	J. E. Norman;K. N. Egger	1999	Molecular phylogenetic analysis of Peziza and related genera	Mycologia	91	5	820-829		http://www.jstor.org/stable/3761535		In a previous study of the genus Plicaria and its relationship to Peziza, the molecular phylogeny that was generated suggested Peziza is paraphyletic. The objective of this study was to explore this problem by examining a larger sample of Peziza species, by increasing the length of DNA sequence analyzed, and by including in the analysis additional genera in the Pezizaceae. DNA sequences were obtained from the 5' internal transcribed spacer region, the divergent domains D1 and D2 of the 28S gene, and most of the 18S gene of the nuclear-encoded ribosomal DNA. Maximum-likelihood analysis of these sequences indicates that Peziza is composed of at least two distinct clades: the first clade contains taxa with mostly smooth to finely-roughened, eguttulate ascospores and Oedocephalum anamorphs, the second clade contains mostly taxa with warted, guttulate ascospores and Chromelosporium anamorphs. Separate generic status for Kimbropezia is not supported by the phylogenetic analysis and Peziza quelepidotia is sufficiently distinct to retain its original status as Lepidotia hispida. This study is the first to suggest a phylogenetic link between the mitotic fungus Glischroderma, and the genera Scabropezia and Pachyphloeus. Other hypogeous species that belong in the Pezizaceae include Cazia flexiascus, Terfezia arenaria and Terfezia terfezioides.
S305	S. Peterson;S. Corneli;T. J. Hjelle;M. A. Miller-Hjelle;D. M. Nowak;P. A. Bonneau	1999	Penicillium pimiteouiense: a new species isolated from polycystic kidney cell cultures	Mycologia	91	2			http://www.jstor.org/stable/3761372	fungi; polycystic kidney disease; rDNA; systematics; Trichocomaceae	As part of a study of polycystic kidney disease (PKD), epi- thelial cells were isolated and propagated from cyst walls of human kidneys obtained a nephrectomy. A Penicillium species was found growing with the epithelial cells in some culture flasks. It was monoverticillate and somewhat resembled P. restrictum but differed morphologically from this and all other Penicillium species. Two strains of this fungus were isolated in pure culture and described as the new species Penicillium pimiteouiense. We assayed the new species for ochratoxin A production because various Penicillium and Aspergillus species are known to produce this potent nephrotoxin, and the new species was isolated only from diseased kidney cell cultures. Ochratoxin A production was not detected in P. pimiteouiense. The role this fungus plays in polycystic kidney disease is unknown, but it has only be found associated with human PKD kidney tissue cultures.
S796	E. M. Pine;D. S. Hibbett;M. J. Donoghue	1999	Phylogenetic relationships of cantharelloid and clavarioid homobasidiomycetes based on mitochondrial and nuclear rDNA sequences	Mycologia	91	6	944-963		http://www.jstor.org/stable/3761626	Cantharellaceae; Clavariaceae; evolution; fungi; Gomphaceae; phylogeny; ribosomal DNA; systematics	Sequence data from mitochondrial and nuclear small subunit rDNA were used to estimate phylogenetic relationships of cantharelloid and clavarioid Homobasidiomycetes. Sixty-five diverse Homobasidiomycete species were investigated, including 23 cantharelloid and clavarioid species. Although nodes deep in the tree could not be resolved, four lineages containing cantharelloid and clavarioid fungi were identified. (i) Cantharellaceae (Cantharellus, Craterellus) is closely related to Hydnum, which is toothed, Stichoclavaria, which is a simple club, and Clavulina, which is coralloid. These taxa all have stichic nuclear division, which is a synapomorphy supporting this clade. (ii) Clavariadelphus is closely related to Gomphus and Ramaria. This relationship is supported by green reactions of sporocarps treated with iron salts, which is reflective of the presence of the compound pistillarin. The nearest relatives of these cantharelloid and clavarioid fungi are gasteromycetes, including the earth star Geastrum, the stinkhorn Pseudocolus, and the cannon-ball fungus Sphaerobolus. (iii) The clavarioid fungi Clavaria, Clavulinopsis, Pterula, and Typhula appear to be derived from the lineage that contains most of the gilled fungi. (iv) Clavicorona is closely related to Auriscalpium, which is toothed, and Lentinellus, which is gilled. This lineage is united by amyloid spore ornamentation. Although these results suggest that there has been extensive convergence in fruiting body morphology, certain anatomical and biochemical features appear to be phylogenetically informative, notably stichic nuclear division, presence of pistillarin, and cyanophily or amyloidity of spore ornamentation.
S545	T. Sahr;H. Ammer;H. Besl;M. Fischer	1999	Infrageneric classification of the boleticolous genus Sepedonium: species delimitation and phylogenetic relationships	Mycologia	91	6	935-943		http://www.jstor.org/stable/3761625	Boletales; DNA sequence analysis; Hypomyces; pigment chemistry; systematics	Morphological and anatomical features, pigment chemistry, host specifity and culture behavior were examined for about 200 stocks of the boleticolous anamorph genus Sepedonium. A sequence analysis of the internal transcribed spacer region of the nuclear ribosomal RNA genes (including ITSI, 5.8S, ITSII) was performed with 52 of these stocks. Phylogenetic trees were generated using neighbor joining and parsimony. The outgroup taxa were Hypomyces boletiphagus and Cladobotryum varium. Our DNA data indicate a subdivision of the Sepedonium isolates into eight monophyletic taxa, seven of them assignable to accepted species. Extensive descriptions are provided for all species. One species, S. laevigatum, is described as new. An evaluation is presented for the systematic significance of the characters studied. A morphological key is provided.
S346	O. Salazar;J. H. M. Schneider;M. C. Julián;J. Keijer;V. Rubio	1999	Phylogenetic subgrouping of Rhizoctonia solani AG 2 isolates based on ribosomal ITS sequences	Mycologia	91	3	459-467		http://www.jstor.org/stable/3761346	anastomosis group; basidiomycete; fusion frequency; internal transcribed spacers; parsmony; Thanatephorus cucumeris	In Rhizoctonia solani differences in the sequences of ribosomal DNA correlate with differences in habitat and virulence. All the current data agree for a completely conserved 5.8 S region, but show variation in both internal transcribed spacers (ITS) regions. This variation in size and nucleotide sequence, in general, is proportionately greater within isolates with greater differences in anastomosis compatibility, pathogenicity and habitat. Rhizoctonia solani AG 2 is geographically widespread and consists of several anastomosis subgroups with specific pathogenic behavior. To obtain insight in the phylogenetic relations among subgroups, and between subgroups and geographically separated isolates, the complete DNA sequences of the ITS regions of 31 isolates of Rhizoctonia solani AG 2 and one isolate each of AG BI and AG 1 were determined, aligned and processed for phylogenetic reconstruction. The results presented here confirm the previously established subgroups of AG 2-1, AG 2-2 and AG 2-3, support the division of AG 2-2 into at least two subgroups, and furthermore divide AG 2-1 into three phylogenetically distinct entities: AG 2-1 and Japanese AG 2-1 and Dutch AG 2-t isolates. The AG BI isolate was phylogenetically closer to the AG 2-1 complex than to AG 2-2 or AG 2-3. Apparently fusion frequency among isolates from different subgroups is not in direct correlation with the phylogenetic relationship.
S379	J. P. Sampaio;R. Bauer;D. Begerow;F. Oberwinkler	1999	Occultifur externus sp. nov., a new species of a simple-pored auricularioid heterobasidiomycete from plant litter in Portugal	Mycologia	91	6	1094-1101		http://www.jstor.org/stable/3761639	heterobasidiomycetes; systematics; ultrastructure; yeasts	A new species of a dimorphic simple-pored auricularioid heterobasidiomycete, Occultifur externus, is described. This fungus was initially isolated in the unicellular stage and identified, on the basis of standard yeast identification tests, as the anamorphic pink yeast Rhodotorula minuta. Later, we found that this yeast was able to complete its life cycle on solid laboratory media. Two yeast cells conjugated, and gave origin to mycelium with clamp connections. The same generative hyphae produced clusters of four-celled basidia and characteristic swollen conidiogenic cells that released dikaryotic conidia. Haustoria-like structures were formed. Nuclear DNA-DNA hybridization experiments revealed that O. externus is not the teleomorphic stage of R. minuta and molecular sequence data from the large subunit of the rDNA supported the affiliation of O. externus to the Naohidea-Sakaguchia clade of the Urediniomycetes. Ultrastructural studies revealed the presence of simple septal pores. Cylindrical reticulate bodies were frequently found occluding them. These unique bodies could also be detected in O. internus, which supports the placement of both taxa in the same genus.
S263	C. L. Schardl;A. Leuchtmann	1999	Three new species of Epichloë symbiotic with North American grasses	Mycologia	91	1	95-107		http://www.jstor.org/stable/3761196	3-tubulin gene, biological species, Clavicipitaceae, host specificity, molecular systematics, Neotyphodium, grass endophytes, symbiosis	The genus Epichloë sensu stricto includes several mating populations (biological species) of endophytic fungal symbionts of cool season grasses. To date, six Eurasian and one North American morphospecies have been described, and these approximately correspond to six distinct mating populations. Here we describe three additional Epichloë species found in natural symbioses with grasses native to North America. In mating tests the three species were not interfertile with each other or any previously described Epichloë species. Sequences of b-tubulin gene introns, which have been useful for Epichloë phylogenetics, clearly distinguished the three species, isolates of each constituting a well supported clade. The three new species were host specific: Epichloë brachyelytri was naturally associated only with Brachyelytrum erectum, E. elymi only with Elymus species, and E. glyceriae only with Glyceria striata. While most morphological characteristics of E. elymi and E. glyceriae were typical of the genus, the ascus structure of E. brachyelytri was unique among described Epichloë species. Vertical transmission by systemic infection of host seeds was common for E. brachyelytri and E. elymi but never occurred for E. glyceriae. Conversely, E. glyceriae developed stromata on every infected host inflorescence (preventing its maturation), E. elymi produced stromata on some but not all inflorescences, and E. brachyelytri almost never produced stromata. Thus, symbioses of the three new Epichloë species with host grasses span the continuum from antagonistic to commensal or mutualistic.
S376	S. O. Suh;M. Blackwell	1999	Molecular phylogeny of the cleistothecial fungi placed in Cephalothecaceae and Pseudeurotiaceae	Mycologia	91	5	836-848		http://www.jstor.org/stable/3761537	Ascomycetes; cleistothecia; perithecia; plectomycetes; pyrenomycetes; ribosomal DNA	Ample evidence from both morphological and molecular characters has accumulated to establish that the cleistothecial ascoma has been derived independently on different occasions from perithecial and apothecial ascomycetes. In order to clarify the phylogenetic position of additional species of cleistothecial ascomycetes, particularly those placed in the Cephalothecaceae and Pseudeurotiaceae of the Eurotiales, partial sequences of the small and large subunit ribosomal DNAs of fourteen taxa were compared with those of other ascomycetes. Phylogenetic trees from both sequence sets showed that some species in Pseudeurotiaceae are closely related to the taxa of four different orders of the perithecial ascomycetes (Hypocreales, Sordariales, Ophiostomatales, and Xylariales). Others (species of Pleuroascus, Connersia, Leuconeurospora, and Pseudeurotium) were not closely related to perithecial ascomycetes or Eurotiales, but to discomycetes and loculoascomycetes. Cephalotheca sulfurea, the type of the Cephalothecaceae, formed a monophyletic group with pseudeurotiaceous species of Cryptendoxyla and Albertiniella. The phylogeny provided in this study suggests strongly that all of these fungi are excluded from the Eurotiales where they have been placed and that they do not form a natural group.
S384	Y. Tanabe;N. Takahiko;M. Saikawa;J. Sugiyama	1999	Phylogenetic relationship of Cephaliophora to nematophagous hyphomycetes including taxonomic and nomenclatural emendations of the genus Lecophagus	Mycologia	91	5	830-835		http://www.jstor.org/stable/3761536	Arthrobotrys; Ascodesmis; 18S rDNA; evolution; predator	The rotifer-capturing fungus Cephaliophora muscicola has many systematic and nomenclatural problems. It was described originally as Lecophagus fasciculatus and classified as a Zygomycete. To address the systematic position of this fungus and to infer the phylogenetic relationsips within other hyphomycetes, we determined and analyzed 18S rDNA sequences of C. muscicola and several of its predacious and nonpredacious relatives. Our phylogenetic analyses indicate that C. muscicola forms a monophyletic clade with nematophagous hyphomycetes, such as Arthrobotrys spp. This result indicates that the predacious nature of these fungi might be plesiomorphic for this lineage. The nonpredacious species of Cephaliophora, including the type species C. tropica, are distantly related to this lineage. Therefore the rotifer-capturing species of Cephaliophora, C. muscicola and C. longispora, are transferred to the anamorphic genus Lecophagus, and we have emended the genus accordingly.
S314	W. A. Untereiner;F. A. Naveaeu	1999	Molecular systematics of the Herpotrichiellaceae with an assessment of the phylogenetic positions of Exophiala dermatitidis and Phialophora americana	Mycologia	91	1	67-83		http://www.jstor.org/stable/3761194	Ascomycetes; black yeasts; Capronia; Cladosporium; phylogeny, ribosomal rDNA, systematics	Despite a significant body of evidence in support of the close phylogenetic relationship of species of Capronia (Herpotrichiellaceae) and black yeasts belonging to or allied with the genus Exophiala, questions concerning the taxonomic importance of features furnished by ascospore, stromal and anamorph characters have remained unanswered. In order to address these issues and to elucidate more fully relationships within the family, we have sequenced a portion of the nuclear large ribosomal RNA subunit (28S), the 5.8S gene, and the internal transcribed spacers (ITS1 and ITS2) of 15 species of Capronia and 19 black yeasts assigned to the form genera Cladosporium, Cladophialophora, Exophiala, Fonsecaea, Phaeococcomyces, Phialophora, Ramichloridium and Rhinocladiella. Cladistic analysis of these data confirmed the monophyly of the Herpotrichiellaceae but did not support the division of the genus Capronia on the basis of conidial ontogeny, pattern of ascospore septation, or the degree of stromal development. Homothallic species of Capronia with 8-spored asci, muriform ascospores and Exophiala anamorphs formed a well-supported lineage that included the medically important species Exophiala dermatitidis. Capronia mansonii and Capronia munkii, morphologically similar taxa isolated from the wood of Populus, were inferred as closely related but separate species. The clade comprising members of the Herpotrichiellaceae that possess Cladosporium-like and Phialophora anamorphs was also strongly supported. Available molecular evidence indicates that Dictyotrichiella semiimmersa and Phialophora americana are teleomorph and anamorph states of a single holomorph. Cladistic analysis also confirmed that the genera Cladophialophora and Ramichloridium are polyphyletic. The anamorphs of Capronia nigerrima and Dictyotrichiella semiimmersa are described and illustrated, and the combination Capronia semiimmersa is proposed.
S419	D. K. Aanen;T. W. Kuyper;T. Boekhout;R. F. Hoekstra	2000	Phylogenetic relationships in the genus Hebeloma based on ITS 1 and 2 sequences, with special emphasis on the Hebeloma crustuliniforme complex	Mycologia	92	2	269-281		http://www.jstor.org/stable/3761560	Agaricales; ectomycorrhiza; evolution; host specificity; phylogeny; sexual intercompatibility	Phylogenetic relationships within the genus Hebeloma (Cortinariaceae, Agaricales) were determined, based on nuclear ribosomal ITS sequences, using cladistic methods. Special emphasis was on phylogenetic relationships within the H. crustuliniforme complex. In total 52 collections were analysed, representing 39 taxa. Agrocybe praecox and two species of Alnicola were used as outgroups. The genus Hebeloma appears to be monophyletic. Several well supported clades could be recognized. However, many of the basal relationships are unresolved or only weakly supported. Alternative topologies could not be rejected. It is therefore impossible to derive a revised infrageneric classification of Hebeloma. The H. crustuliniforme complex appears paraphyletic, consisting of two clades with three and 17 InterCompatibility Groups respectively. In the second clade many of the phylogenetic relationships are also unresolved, reflecting a high rate of recent speciation events. Most of the species in this clade form ectomycorrhizae with members of the Salicaceae. The taxon that is basal to this clade, however, is not associated with these hosts. The host tree switch to Salicaceae has been followed by extensive and rapid speciation.
S464	E. C. A. Abeln;M. A. de Pagter;G. J. M. Verkley	2000	Phylogeny of Pezicula, Dermea and Neofabraea inferred from partial sequences of the nuclear ribosomal RNA gene cluster	Mycologia	92	4	685-693		http://www.jstor.org/stable/3761426	anthracnose; Cryptosporiopsis; Dermateaceae; ITS; Ocellaria; Phlyctema; rDNA; Scleropzicula; taxonomy 	The phylogenetic relation between Pezicula, Dermea and Neofabraea species (Dermateaceae, Leotiales) was investigated using sequence analysis of part of the 18S ribosomal DNA, the internal transcribed spacer 1, the 5.8S ribosomal DNA and the internal transcribed spacer 2. DNA was isolated from 44 CBS- strains (7 Dermea, 3 Neofabraea and 34 Pezicula species). Parsimony analysis confirmed the morphology-based hypothesis that Ocellaria ocellata should be considered as a true Pezicula species. Furthermore, the position of two taxa (Pezicula malicorticis and Pezicula alnicola) was found to be outside the Pezicula main cluster.
S430	G. Bakkeren;J. W. Kronstad;C. A. Levesque	2000	Comparison of AFLP fingerprints and ITS sequences as phylogenetic markers in Ustilaginomycetes	Mycologia	92	3	510-521		http://www.jstor.org/stable/3761510	basidiomycete; bunt fungus; host plant; pathogen; phylogeny; smut; taxonomy; Ustilaginales; Ustilago	We have compared the use of DNA sequences from the genomic internal transcribed spacer (ITS) ribosomal RNA region, with a newer method, the amplified fragment length polymorphism (AFLP) technique. ITS sequences encompass only a small part of the genome but normally reveal sufficient variability to distinguish isolates at the genus and often the species level. Although the AFLP technology reveals genome-wide restriction fragment length polymorphisms, it has not been employed extensively in establishing phylogenetic relationships. We have adapted the AFLP technology for fungal genomes and compared AFLP fingerprints generated from several fungal species and isolates from the order Ustilaginales: Ustilago hordei, U. nigra, U. aegilopsidis, U. avenae, U. kolleri, U. bullata, U. nuda, U. tritici, U. maydis, U. scitaminea, Sporisorium reilianum, and Tilletiales, Tilletia indica and T. walkeri. Geographical isolates of U. hordei and related species, particularly those infecting small-grain cereals, were difficult to distinguish when comparing ITS sequences, but were clearly separated when comparing AFLP fingerprints. The abundance of polymorphisms makes the AFLP technique more suitable to distinguish organisms in clusters of closely related species and at the isolate level. Phylogenetic analyses of the data sets generated with the two methods revealed that the AFLP-derived phylogenetic relationships were not in disagreement with the ITS-derived tree. The fungal phylogenetic tree correlated additionally with one from the graminaceous hosts generated from literature data, suggesting coevolution of some specialized host-pathogen systems. The clustering of small grain-infecting smuts due to limited genetic variability, in combination with other molecular, mating and literature data, suggests reclassification of this group possibly to include varietas designations to define host range.
S491	G. L. Benny;K. O'Donnell	2000	Amoebidium parasiticum is a protozoan, not a trichomycete (Zygomycota)	Mycologia	92	6	1133-1137		http://www.jstor.org/stable/3761480	Amoebidiales; 18S rRNA; Ichthyosporea; mitochondrial cristae; phylogeny; Zygomycota	Classification of the Amoebidiales (Trichomycetes, Zygomycota) within the Fungi is problematical because their cell walls apparently lack chitin and they produce amoeboid cells during their life cycle. A nearly full-length fragment of the nuclear small subunit (SSU) rRNA of Amoebidium parasiticum was amplified by the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and sequenced to examine its phylogenetic relationships. Results of a BlastN search of GenBank revealed that the A. parasiticum SSU rRNA sequence was most closely related to Ichthyophonus hoferi, an ichthysporean in the Protozoa near the animal-fungal divergence. Maximum parsimony analysis of ichthysporean and fungal SSU sequences, using sequences of choanoflagellates to root the 18S rDNA gene trees, resolved A. parasiticum as a strongly supported sister of I. hoferi within the Ichthyophonida clade of the protozoan class Ichthysporea. In contrast to other members of this class which are mostly obligate or faculative parasities of various animals, A. parasiticum and other members of the Amoebidiales are only known to be arthropodophilous symbionts. The results also provide the first evidence that mitochondrial cristae types exhibit homoplastic distributions within the Ichthysporea.
S409	M. P. S. Câmara;N. R. O'Neill;P. van Berkum;M. E. Palm;P. H. Dernoeden	2000	Ophiosphaerella agrostis sp. nov, and its relationship to other species of Ophiosphaerella	Mycologia	92	2	317-325		http://www.jstor.org/stable/3761560	AFLP; Agrostis palustris; ITS sequence; phylogeny; systematics	Creeping bentgrass (Agrostis palustris Huds.) commonly is grown on golf courses in the United States. In the fall of 1998, symptoms of a new disease were observed on bentgrass putting greens in three states. The causal agent was determined to be an undescribed species of Ophiosphaerella based on morphological characteristics. This was supported by sequence analysis of the complete ITS region of the rDNA. A new species, Ophiosphaerella agrostis, is described based on these morphological and molecular analyses. Intraspecific genetic variation was assessed using Amplified Fragment Length Polymorphism DNA fingerprinting of 17 isolates collected from nine different locations. A 90% similarity was found among the isolates.
S566	M. P. A. Coetzee;B. D. Wingfield;T. A. Coutinho;M. J. Wingfield	2000	Identification of the causal agent of Armillaria root rot of Pinus species in South Africa	Mycologia	92	4	777-785		http://www.jstor.org/stable/3761435	Armillaria fuscipes; PCR-RFLP; IGS-1; phylogeny; rRNA	Armillaria root rot has been known to occur on economically important Pinus and Eucalyptus species grown in plantations in South Africa since the early 1900s. Armillaria species have been well studied in North America and Europe, but have received minimal attention in South Africa. Most reports of Armillaria root rot in South Africa suggest that A. mellea (Vahl.:Fr.) P. Kumm. is the causal agent. The name A. heimii Pegler has also been used in more recent reports, although these have not been based on mycological studies. The taxonomic disposition of Armillaria in South Africa, therefore, remains unknown. The aim of this study was to identify and characterise Armillaria isolates from forest plantations in South Africa based on morphological data, PCR-RFLP profiles and sequence data. Analysis of these characters revealed that the isolates originating from the plantations in South Africa are distinct from A. mellea and A. heimii. We believe that they represent A. fuscipes Petch.
S500	S. Declerck;S. Cranenbrouck;Y. Dalpé;S. Séguin;A. Grandmougin-Ferjani;J. Fontaine;M. Sancholle	2000	Glomus proliferum sp. nov.: a description based on morphological, biochemical, molecular and monoxenic cultivation data	Mycologia	92	6	1178-1187		http://www.jstor.org/stable/3761485	arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi; Glomales; fatty acid; Ri T-DNA transformed root; SSU rDNA; sterol; taxonomy; ultrastructure	A new arbuscular mycorrhizal fungus, Glomus proliferum (Glomales, Zygomycetes) is described. The description, based on a monoxenic culture established in association with a Ri T-DNA transformed carrot root, combines sequencing of the small subunit (SSU) rDNA, spore sterols and fatty acid profiles with more classical taxonomic tools such as optical and electron microscopy. The fungus forms clusters containing hundreds of small, hyaline, four-layered spores. The necessity to use different tools for identification of arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi is discussed.
S479	U. Eberhardt;F. Oberwinkler;A. Verbeken;A. C. Rinaldi;G. Pacioni;O. Comandini	2000	Lactarius ectomycorrhizae on Abies alba: morphological description, molecular characterization, and taxonomic remarks	Mycologia	92	5	830-873		http://www.jstor.org/stable/3761582	ectomycorrhizal fungi; ITS sequences; RFLP	To date, the ectomycorrhizae formed by silver fir (Abies alba), an ecologically valuable and indigenous tree species in many European mountain forests, have been poorly investigated. We characterized the mycorrhizae formed by three Lactarius species (Lac. subsericatus, Lac. intermedius, Lac. salmonicolor) on silver fir, on the basis of material originating from central Italy. The identification of the fungal symbiont was achieved by means of morphoanatomical observations of mycorrhizae, and by comparison of ITS sequences obtained from mycorrhizae and sporocarps of putative fungal partners. Sequences also were obtained from specimens of the same species but from different geographic origin or from closely related Lactarius species. A Maximum Likelihood analysis of the data was performed. On the whole, the resultant tree is in good agreement with sporocarp and mycorrhiza morphology. RFLP patterns were calculated from sequence data. A discussion on the main morphoanatomical characters distinguishing the Lactarius ectomycorrhizae reported in this study from those already described belonging to related species, is also included. The levels of resolution provided by different methods for identifying mycorrhizae, applied to such closely related taxa, are discussed.
S490	M. C. González;R. T. Hanlin;M. Ulloa	2000	Guanomyces, a new genus of ascomycetes from Mexico	Mycologia	92	6	1138–1148		http://www.jstor.org/stable/3761481	Ascomycota; bat dung; coprophilous; rDNA sequences; Sordariales; systematics	A new genus is described to accommodate a species isolated from bat dung. This fungus forms a membranous ascoma with a long neck that is ornamented with lateral glandular hairs and terminal aglandular hairs; filamentous, septate paraphyses and deliquescent asci with hyaline, unicellular ascospores are formed in the base of the centrum. In order to analyze the systematic position of this ascomycete its morphological characters and 18S rDNA sequences were studied and compared with superficially similar species. Based on morphological and phylogenetic analysis of 18S rDNA sequences, this fungus belongs in the Sordariales and is close to but separate from Chaetomium. The hyaline ascospores, without a germ pore, and the possession of an ascoma with a long neck ornamented with lateral glandular hairs is in contrast to other genera of the Chaetomiaceae. For these reasons, the new genus Guanomyces is proposed to accommodate the new species G. polythrix in the Chaetomiaceae, of the Sordariales.
S446	D. S. S. Hudspeth;S. A. Nadler;M. E. S. Hudspeth	2000	A COX2 molecular phylogeny of the Peronosporomycetes	Mycologia	92	4	674-684		http://www.jstor.org/stable/3761425	Achlya; Aphanomyces; Apodachlya; cytochrome c oxidase; Dictyuchus; Hyphochytrium; Lagenidium; Leptolegnia; Leptomitus; Oomycetes; Peronophythora; Peronosporomycetidae; Phytophthora; Plectospira; Pythiopsis; Pythium; Saprolegnia; Saprolegniomycetidae 	The evolutionary history of the mitochondrial cox2 locus has been used to infer the phylogenetic relationships among 15 peronosporomycetes and a hyphochytriomycete species. This molecular phylogenetic analysis at both the ordinal and generic levels provides strong evidence for the recognition of the Saprolegniomycetidae and the Peronosporomycetidae as natural groups, and for the monophyly of the Saprolegniales, Leptomitales and Pythiales. A three amino acid insertion/deletion event (indel) has been identified as a putative synapomorphy for the Saprolegniales. Parsimony mapping of 12 morphological and biochemical characters on the cox2 molecular phylogeny yields an hypothesis for peronosporomycete ancestral states and shared-derived features.
S413	B. D. Hughey;G. C. Adams;T. D. Bruns;D. S. Hibbett	2000	Phylogeny of Calostoma, the gelatinous-stalked puffball, based on the nuclear and mitochondrial ribosomal DNA sequences	Mycologia	92	1	94-104		http://www.jstor.org/stable/3761453	12S rDNA; 18S rDNA; 28S rDNA; Boletales; evolution; Gasteromycete; Gyroporus; Mitremyces ; Pisolithus; Scleroderm	Nucleotide sequence of the nuclear small and large subunit and the mitochondrial small and large ribosomal genes of Calostoma were used to investigate evolutionary relationships with other Basidiomycetes. In separate analyses with each gene, Calostoma was placed within the Boletales and outside the clades containing most gilled mushrooms, puffballs, stalked puffballs, earthstars, stinkhorns and nonboletalean Gasteromycetes. This contradicted previous taxonomic hypotheses. Calostoma was most closely related to Gyroporus, Pisolithus, and Scleroderma based on maximum parsimony and maximum likelihood analysis of the mitochondrial large ribosomal gene database, which contained several representatives of most genera of the Boletales. In three of the four gene trees Calostoma shows an unusually high number of inferred nucleotide substitutions relative to other Boletales; this corresponds to its extreme morphological divergence.
S421	J. Kohlmeyer;J. W. Spatafora;B. Volkmann-Kohlmeyer	2000	Lulworthiales, a new order of marine Ascomycota	Mycologia	92	3	453-458		http://www.jstor.org/stable/3761504	Ascomycetes; Halosphaeriales; Lindra; Lulworthia; Lulworthiaceae; marine fungi; phylogeny; Sordariomycetes	Based on molecular studies using 1031 bp of the gene that codes for the nuclear small subunit (SSU) and 594bp of the gene that codes for the nuclear large subunit (LSU) rDNA and using morphological characters, the genera Lulworthia and Lindra are removed from the Halosphaeriales and assigned to the new order Lulworthiales and new family Lulworthiaceae in the class Sodariomycetes. Eleven accepted species of Lulworthia and 6 species species of Lindra are listed.
S439	E. Lieckfeldt;C. Kullnig;G. J. Samuels;C. P. Kubicek	2000	Sexually competent, sucrose- and nitrate-assimilating strains of Hypocrea jecorina (Trichoderma reesei) from South American soils	Mycologia	92	3	374-380		http://www.jstor.org/stable/3761493	cellulases; DNA sequences; Hypocreales; transport; utilization	Three new strains of Trichoderma reesei, the anamorph of Hypocrea jecorina, are reported from soil in French Guiana and Brazil. Identification of the strains as T. reesei/H. jecorina was confirmed by analysis of the internal transcribed spacer regions 1 and 2 of the nuclear rDNA cluster and by their ability to produce the teleomorph when mated with the appropriate strains. Hypocrea jecorina is considered to reproduce primarily sexually, as opposed to other Hypocrea and Trichoderma species where asexual reproduction predominates. Like the original isolate of T. reesei, Qm 6a, all three new isolates exhibited cellulolytic activities. In contrast to Qm 6a, however, they grew on sucrose as sole carbon source and on nitrate as sole nitrogen source, thus indicating that these substrate utilization criteria are not taxonomically reliable in Hypocrea (Trichoderma). The nonutilization of sucrose and nitrate in QM 6a is due to a lack of the uptake system for sucrose and of nitrite reductase activity, respectively, in that culture. Comparison of QM 6a and the three new isolates revealed that all H. jecorina isolates produce intracellular but not extracellular invertase. The potential for using these strains in the improvement of the commercially exploited strain of T. reesei, QM 6a, is discussed.
S478	K. Lohtander;M. Källersjö;R. Moberg;A. Tehler	2000	The family Physciaceae in Fennoscandia: phylogeny inferred from ITS sequences	Mycologia	92	4	728-735		http://www.jstor.org/stable/3761429	Ascomycetes; Lecanorales; lichenized fungi	The internal transcribed spacers (ITS1 and ITS2), and the 5.8S region of the nuclear ribosomal DNA were sequenced for 52 specimens representing 35, mostly foliose, taxa of the lichen family Physciaceae (Lecanorales). The sequences were phylogenetically analyzed using parsimony jackknifing. Xanthoria parietina and X. sorediata were chosen as outgroups. Because of the variable nature of the ITS regions parsimony jackknifing analyses were performed on different alignments. The analyses resulted in trees with several shared, well-supported groups. A consensus tree, summarizing all the trees from different alignments was also calculated. In that tree the family Physciaceae formed a monophyletic group. Some of the crustose species of Physciaceae (in the genera Amandinea, Buellia and Dimelaena) appeared as two sister groups to the rest of the family. In this latter group Physcia, Heterodermia speciosa and Mobergia calculiformis constituted the sister group to the remaining family, which included the genera Anaptychia, Hyperphyscia, Phaeorrhiza, Phaeophyscia, Physconia and Rinodina. The genus Phaeophyscia was found to be monophyletic with 100 % support. Anaptychia and Physconia, together with Phaeorrhiza nimbosa and Rinodina turfacea formed its sister group. Hyperphyscia adglutinata was found in a trichotomy with the other two groups.
S470	F. N. Martin	2000	Phylogenetic relationships among some Pythium species inferred fromsequence analysis of the mitochondrially-encoded cytochrome oxidase II gene	Mycologia	92	4	711-727		http://www.jstor.org/stable/3761428	Oomycota; phylogeny 	The phylogenetic relationships of 67 isolates representing 24 species of Pythium were assessed by sequence alignment of 684 bp of the mitochondrially-encoded cytochrome oxidase II gene. Sequence differences among species ranged from 1.6 to 14.7 substitutions per 100 bases. The species grouped into three major clades that were, in a general sense, reflective of zoosporangial or hyphal swelling morphology. Clade I contained species with globose to spherical zoosporangia or spherical hyphal swellings. Clade II was comprised of four species, only one of which produced zoosporangia (P. ultimum var. sporangiiferum) with the remaining species producing only spherical hyphal swellings. Species with filamentous to lobulate zoosporangia were in clade III. Pythium oligandrum, a species that produces subglobose zoosporangia with interconnecting filamentous parts was intermediate between species with inflated to lobulate filamentous zoosporangia and species that produced spherical to globose zoosporangia (clades I and II). Two species that produced globose zoosporangia (P. pulchrum and P. rostratum) grouped together separately from the other clades, as did P. nunn. The evolutionary relationships among species obtained by analysis of cox II DNA sequence data corresponds well with the genomic location of this mitochondrially encoded gene as well as the location of the nuclear encoded 5S rRNA gene for a subset of species examined. Characteristics such as heterothallism, oogonial ornamentation, mycoparasitism and the presence of linear mitochondrial genomes were polyphyletic. The only species that contained isolates that did not group together were P. ultimum and P. irregulare; possible reasons for this are discussed.
S482	C. D. Moon;B. Scott;C. L. Schardl;M. J. Christensen	2000	The evolutionary origins of Epichloë endophytes from annual ryegrasses	Mycologia	92	6	1103-1118		http://www.jstor.org/stable/3761478	ß-tubulin gene; interspecific hybridization; Lolium; molecular systematics; Neotyphodium endophytes; rDNA-ITS; symbiosis 	The annual Lolium (ryegrass) species were surveyed for seedborne, asexual Epichloë endophytes (ie. Neotyphodium spp.). Extremely slow growing endophytes were isolated from all seven annual ryegrass spp. Sequences of ﬂ-tubulin gene (tub2) introns and the internal transcribed spacers of the nuclear ribosomal RNA (rDNA-ITS) were determined, as were fingerprints based on five microsatellite loci. Two taxonomic groups of annual ryegrass endophytes were distinguishable by morphology, culturability and genotypes. One group, for which the name Neotyphodium occultans is proposed, was comprised solely of isolates that could not by subcultured on potato dextrose agar medium. These isolates contained multiple tub2 genes and multiple alleles at microsatellite loci, suggestive of an interspecific hybrid origin. The results of phylogenetic analysis implied that the ancestors of N. occultans included Epichloë baconii and Epichloë bromicola, or close relatives. The second taxonomic group of annual ryegrass endophytes, exemplified by isolate Lc4, was found only in L. canariense. This taxon had a single tub2 sequence and microsatellite genotype that was nearly identical to those of extant Epichloë typhina isolates that infect Poa nemoralis. Therefore, it is proposed that Lc4 is an asexual derivative of an E. typhina genotype closely related to extant strains from P. nemoralis. We propose the name Neotyphodium typhinum var. canariense for this form. These two new endophyte taxa from the annual ryegrasses are further examples of asexual Neotyphodium species that have arisen from sexual Epichloë spp. either directly by loss of the sexual state, or by interspecific hybridization events.
S404	Y. Mori;Y. Sato;S. Takamatsu	2000	Evolutionary analysis of the powdery mildew fungi using nucleotide sequences of the nuclear ribosomal DNA	Mycologia	92	1	74-93		http://www.jstor.org/stable/3761452	Ascomycete; Erysiphaceae; ITS; molecular evolution; phylogeny; plant pathogen	The nucleotide sequences of the nuclear ribosomal DNA including 18S, 5.8S, and 28S rDNA and the internal transcribed spacer regions were determined for 33 powdery mildew taxa spanning 15 genera to infer the phylogenetic relationships for these fungi. Phylogenetic analyses revealed that Uncinula septata was placed in the primitive base to the large clade composed of all other powdery mildew taxa. Powdery mildews excluding Uncinula septata were split into five major lineages. The Pseudoidium lineage consisted of six genera, i.e., Erysiphe, Microsphaera, Uncinula, Uncinuliella, Brasiliomyces, and Typhulochaeta, all of which are characterized by polyascal cleistothecia and Pseudoidium-type anamorph. The Euoidium lineage consisted of three Erysiphe species (E. cichoracearum, E. orontii and E. galeopsidis) and Arthrocladiella mougeotii, which are characterized by poly-ascal cleistothecia and Euoidium-type anamorph. The endophytic lineage consisted of two Phyllactinia species (Phy. moricola and Phy. kakicola), Leveillula taurica and Pleochaeta shiraiana, which are characterized by the presence of endophytic or partly endophytic mycelia. The fibrosin lineage consisted of the genera Sawadaea, Cystotheca, Podosphaera, and Sphaerotheca, all of which are characterized by the presence of well-developed fibrosin bodies in the conidia and conidiophores. The monocot lineage consisted of a single species, Blumeria graminis, which is well characterized by being parasitic to monocots, especially to cereal plants. Character polarization was discussed on several major characteristics. The mycelioid appendage which has long been regarded as an ancestral character may be a derived character as a result of an event that may have occurred multiple times independently due to convergence. Euoidium anamorph and clavate appressorial germ tube are considered to be ancestral characters to Pseudoidium anamorph and lobed germ tube. Ectophytic nature and polyascal cleistothecia are also regarded as ancestral features to endophytic nature and monoascal cleistothecia.
S817	K. O'Donnell	2000	Molecular phylogeny of the Nectria haematococca-Fusarium solani species complex	Mycologia	92	5	919-938		http://www.jstor.org/stable/3761588	ascomycetes; biogeography; formae speciales; Hypocreales; Nectriaceae; systematics; translation elongation factor EF-lα	Phylogenetic relationships and biogeography of die phytopathogenic Nectria haematococca-Fusarium solani species complex, section Martiella of Fusarium, were inferred from sequence data from the nuclear large subunit 285 rDNA, the nuclear ribosomal internal transcribed spacer (ITS) region and translation elongation factor (EF-la) gene introns and exons. Although a partition homogeneity test detected significant incongruence between the 288 rDNA and ITS datasets, results of the nonparametric Wilcoxon signed-ranks Templeton test indicated that the data could be combined. Maximum parsimony analysis of the combined dataset identified 26 phylogenetically distinct ingroup species, of which 15 are heterothallic,7 are homothallic and 4 are putatively mitosporic. Included among these were 9 formae speciales described for F: solani which were all resolved as phylogenetically distinct species by the molecular phylogeny. Of these, F solani f. sp, cucurbitae races 1 and 2 appear to represent reproductively isolated biological species with independent evolutionary origins. Results of the molecular phylogeny also provide strong support for clades within New Zealand, South America, Africa and India-Sri Lanka. The complex historical biogeography of this complex appears to reflect vicariant events associated with the fragmentation of Gondwanaland, possible gondwanic range expansions together with relatively recent distributional changes in these fungi associated with movement of economically important plants.
S462	C. Olivier;M. L. Berbee;R. A. Shoemaker;R. Loria	2000	Molecular phylogenetic support from ribosomal DNA sequences for origin of Helminthosporium from Leptosphaeria-like loculoascomycete ancestors	Mycologia	92	4	736-746 			ascomycete phylogeny; Bipolaris; Cochliobolus; Drechslera; Exserohilum; H. solani; H. velutinum; internal transcribed spacers; Pleosporales; Pyrenophora; rDNA; Setosphaeria 	Internal transcribed spacer (ITS) regions and 5.8S rDNA were PCR-amplified and sequenced for 17 isolates of Helminthosporium solani, cause of the potato disease silver scurf, and for 10 other isolates obtained from culture collections as Helminthosporium spp. Of these, five isolates had been incorrectly identified as Helminthosporium spp. and belonged in the genera Cochliobolus (anamorphs Bipolaris, Curvularia), Cladosporium, and Pyrenophora (anamorph Drechslera). Sequence alignment and analyses of ITS regions and 5.8S rDNA of four true Helminthosporium species and more than 45 fungi formerly grouped in the genus Helminthosporium sensu lato revealed that the segregated Helminthosporium species did not group with Helminthosporium s.s. Three species of Helminthosporium s.s. (H. solani, type species H. velutinum, and H. chlorophorae) grouped tightly and were most closely related to the teleomorph Leptosphaeria bicolor. For H. solani and H. velutinum, 18SrDNA sequences were also determined. Phylogenetic analyses of the 18S rDNA sequences of 33 euascomycetous species confirmed the close relationship of H. solani and H. velutinum to L. bicolor and placed Helminthosporium in the Pleosporales with 100% parsimony bootstrap support. Helminthosporium asterinum did not group closely with the other species of Helminthosporium s.s., but was as closely related to discomycetes in the Leotiales as to other true Helminthosporium spp. Review of type material revealed that H. asterinum could be excluded from the genus Helminthosporium based on morphology.
S434	J. L. Platt;J. W. Spatafora	2000	Evolutionary relationships of nonsexual lichenized fungi: molecular phylogenetic hypotheses for the genera Siphula and Thamnolia from SSU and LSU rDNA	Mycologia	92	3	475-487		http://www.jstor.org/stable/3761506	Baeomycetaceae; Icmadophilaceae; Helotiales; Siphulaceae	The nonsexual lichenized family Siphulaceae is comprised of the obligately sterile genera, Siphula and Thamnolia. These genera are currently placed in the order Lecanorales, apparently based soley on the character of lichenization since apothecia and other lichen reproductive structures are absent. Using the nucleotide characters of rDNA, we tested the phylogenetic position of these genera among the Ascomycota. Cladistic analyses of SSU nrDNA and partial LSU nrDNA did not support the recognition of the Siphulaceae. Rather, Siphula and Thamnolia represent independent origins of nonsexual lichens among the Icmadophilaceae; a family that is currently classified in the order Helotiales. In addition to these molecular characters, the secondary chemistry of these genera also supports their affinity with the Icmadophilaceae. We propose taxonomically emending the Icmadophilaceae to include the genera Siphula and Thamnolia. The phylogenetic relationships between the Icmadophilaceae and the Baeomycetaceae, the other family of lichenized fungi classified in the Helotiales, are discussed. Cladistic evidence is provided which demonstrates that the Baeomycetaceae is a distinct taxon from the Icmadophilaceae and the two families represent independent lichenization events. The phylogenetic relationships between these families and other higher taxa (e.g., families and orders) of the Ascomycota are also discussed.
S408	A. Pringle;J. M. Moncalvo;R. Vilgalys	2000	High levels of variation in ribosomal DNA sequences within and among spores of a natural population of the arbuscular mycorrhizal fungus Acaulospora colossica	Mycologia	92	2	259-268		http://www.jstor.org/stable/3761559	AM fungi; asexual; endosymbiont; genetic variation; Glomales; internuclear; intranuclear; ITS; mutualism; VAM fungi	Sequences of the nuclear rDNA ITS region were sampled from a natural population of an arbuscular mycorrhizal fungus, Acaulospora colossica. Three levels of sampling were employed: within an individual (a single spore), between individuals of a single soil sample, and between individuals of different soil samples across a 36 m2 area. High levels of ITS sequence variation were discovered, and sequences from different spores and different soil samples were sometimes more similar than sequences of the same spore or soil sample. These results demonstrate a complex pattern of rDNA organization within a natural population of Glomalean fungi, and challenge ideas of individuality and collectivism in fungi.
S810	M. Réblová;K. Winka	2000	Phylogeny of Chaetosphaeria and its anamorphs based on morphological and molecular data	Mycologia	92	5	939-954		http://www.jstor.org/stable/3761589	Ascomycetes; Chaetosphaeriaceae; Knoxdaviesia; life history; Melanopsammella; molecular study; ribosomal DNA; systematics	In order to more fully elucidate the phylogenetic relationships of the lignicolous, pyrenomycetous genus Chaetosphaeria and its anamorphs and reveal the most reliable molecular data set we sequenced a portion of the large nuclear ribosomal RNA gene (LSU rDNA) and the complete ITS region (ITS1, the 5.8S rRNA gene and ITS2) of 25 members of the Chaetosphaeriaceae including Porosphaerella cordanophora, Striatosphaeria codinaeophora, species of Chaetosphaeria and Melanopsammella, and representatives of eight of the eleven of their anamorph genera. Phylogenetic analyses were performed on four different data sets. The phylogeny inferred from the LSU rDNA sequence data showed two main groups, each with two subgroups, within the monophyletic Chaetosphaeriaceae. These subgroups are easily identified by morphological features of anamorphs and teleomorphs and serve as a background to subdivide the Chaetosphaeria species in to two, respectively, two and four natural groups of taxa. Two sexual species currently referred to Chaetosphaeria and two related asexual species grouped with Hypocreales and Microascales, respectively. Knoxdaviesia is relegated to synonymy with Custingophora. The morphology-based classification of Chaetosphaeria is compared with results from analyses of molecular data. The taxonomic value of morphological characters observed in teleomorphs and dematiaceous hyphomycetous anamorphs is discussed in the light of the results of these analyses.
S415	D. Redecker;J. B. Morton;T. D. Bruns	2000	Molecular phylogeny of the arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi Glomus sinuosum and Sclerocystis coremioides	Mycologia	92	2	282-285		http://www.jstor.org/stable/3761561	Glomales; ribosomal DNA	We report the first molecular analysis of arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi previously classified in the genus Sclerocystis. Fungi in Sclerocystis sensu lato were distinguished by formation of complex sporocarps. Most species were transferred to Glomus, but both their taxonomic and phylogenetic relations remain the subject of controversy. Phylogenetic analysis of the 18S ribosomal subunit of G. sinuosum (= S. sinuosa) and S. coremioides shows that both species are each other's closest relatives and fall within a monophyletic clade comprising the well-characterized species, G. mosseae, G. intraradices and G. vesiculiferum, to the exclusion of several other Glomus species. This placement indicates that formation of complex sporocarps is an advanced character of some Glomus species, but the sporocarpic trait is not sufficiently unique to group these species into a separate genus Sclerocystis.
S483	M. T. Seidl	2000	Phylogenetic relationships within Cortinarius subgenus Myxacium, sections Defibulati and Myxacium	Mycologia	92	6	1091-1102		http://www.jstor.org/stable/3761477	Agaricales; Basidiomycetes; clamp; connections; ectomycorrhizal; nuclear rDNA; parsimony, phylogeny	Phylogenetic relationships of two sections from subgenus Myxacium in the brown-spored agaric genus Cortinarius were studied using nuclear DNA sequence data from the internal transcribed spacers (ITS1 and ITS2) and the 5.88 rRNA gene of 23 species of Cortinarius, including seven subgenera. Of these, ten species represent the focal study group from sections Defibulati and Myxacium, three species represent three additional sections within subgenus Myxacium, and ten species represent six remaining subgenera within Cortinarius. Phylogenies inferred using parsimony and maximum likelihood strongly supported the two sections as monophyletic, but did not support the subgenus Myxacium as a distinct lineage. Neither method of analysis resolved relationships below the sectional level. Morphological traits were examined for the two monophyletic groups traditionally classified as sections Defibulati and Myxacium. Absence of clamp connections is a synapomorphy of section Defibulati. Cladistic analyses confirm that members sampled from subgenus Myxacium in other sections are more closely allied with other subgenera, suggesting the current taxonomy needs revision to reflect phylogenetic relationships.
S468	R. F. Sullivan;G. F. Bills;N. L. Hywel-Jones;J. F. White Jr	2000	Hyperdermium: a new clavicipitalean genus for some tropical epibionts of dicotyledonous plants	Mycologia	92	5	908-918		http://www.jstor.org/stable/3761587	Clavicipitaceae; Cordycipitoideae; Epichloë bertonii; Hyperdermium bertonii; Hyperdermium pulvinatum; perithecial ontogeny; systematics	The morphological characteristics of two tropical clavicipitalean fungi on species of the plant family Asteraceae were examined. These species were found to be superficial on the stems of living plants but early stages of infection involve necrotrophy of scale insects. These fungi are distinct from other Clavicipitaceae by possession of anamorphs producing multiseptate conidia. A new genus, Hyperdermium, was proposed to accommodate these two species. In cultures on potato dextrose agar overlaid with cellulose acetate sheets, both species produced colonies resembling those on plant tissues. Hyperdermium bertonii produced conidia in culture but not perithecia. Hyperdermium pulvinatum produced both conidia and perithecia in culture. Phylogenetic analysis using large subunit rDNA sequences placed Hyperdermium in the subfamily Cordycipitoideae. A study was made of perithecial ontogeny in H. pulvinatum. Centrum development was of the Epichloë-type.
S392	R. G. Thorn;J. M. Moncalvo;C. A. Reddy;R. Vilgalys	2000	Phylogenetic analyses and the distribution of nematophagy support a monophyletic Pleurotaceae within the polyphyletic pleurotoid-lentinoid fungi	Mycologia	92	2	241-252		http://www.jstor.org/stable/3761557	Agaricales; molecular phylogeny; mushrooms; nematode-trapping fungi; wood-decay fungi	Phylogenetic analyses based on partial sequences from nuclear 25S rDNA indicate a monophyletic Pleurotaceae, consisting of the monophyletic genera Pleurotus and Hohenbuehelia, within the polyphyletic pleurotoid-lentinoid fungi. The attack and consumption of nematodes (nematophagy) supports the monophyly of this family. Other pleurotoid-lentinoid fungi that have been studied are not nematophagous and, in phylogenetic analyses, occur within the euagaric, polyporoid and russuloid clades. The pleurotoid agarics Lampteromyces, Lentinula, Nothopanus, and Omphalotus form a clade together with Gymnopus dryophilus. A clade that corresponds to the Tricholomataceae includes the pleurotoid agarics Conchomyces, Hypsizygus, Phyllotopsis, and Resupinatus. Faerberia, Heliocybe, Lentinus, Neolentinus, and Panus are gilled polypores, and all deserve recognition at the generic level. The brown-rotters Heliocybe and Neolentinus form a distinct clade within the polypores together with the brown-rotting polypore, Gloeophyllum. The Pleurotaceae belong in the Agaricales, are not closely related to or synonymous with the Polyporaceae, and should be restricted to the genera Pleurotus and Hohenbuehelia. An isolate of Hohenbuehelia from Alberta, Canada produces adhesive knobs typical of Hohenbuehelia and its anamorph Nematoctonus, and also nonadhesive nematotoxic droplets characteristic of Pleurotus. This combination is unique within Hohenbuehelia and Pleurotus. Phylogenetic analyses place this species at the base of the genus Hohenbuehelia, indicating that nematotoxic droplets were probably present in the common ancestor of Pleurotus and Hohenbuehelia. In contrast, the gelatinized fruiting bodies of Hohenbuehelia and Resupinatus are independently derived. The tribe Resupinateae (Tricholomataceae) should be restricted to Resupinatus (including Asterotus) and cyphelloid allies such as Stigmatolemma.
S424	E. J. Vainio;J. Hantula	2000	Genetic differentiation between European and North American populations of Phlebiopsis gigantea	Mycologia	92	3	436-446		http://www.jstor.org/stable/3761502	biocontrol; internal transcribed spacer (ITS); random amplified microsatellites; ribosomal DNA; sequencing 	We investigated the degree of genetic differentiation between geographically isolated populations of the saprophytic fungus Phlebiopsis gigantea from Europe and North America using two different molecular approaches: (i) denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE) and sequence analyses of the ITS region, and (ii) genetic fingerprinting using random amplified microsatellite (RAMS) markers. The analysis included 84 homokaryotic single spore isolates of 28 European strains, 13 heterokaryotic strains from North America, and the Rotstop strain used as a biocontrol agent against Heterobasidion annosum. Three different ITS-alleles (designated as ITS/A, ITS/B and ITS/C) were separable by the DGGE, two of them occurring both in Europe and North America. However, sequence determination of these allele types showed that while the ITS/A alleles were identical between Europe and North America, the ITS/C alleles contained differences. Analysis of molecular variation (AMOVA) and neighbor joining (NJ) clustering analysis using altogether 28 RAMS markers revealed a considerable degree of differentiation between the European and North American populations. The results show that recent human-mediated P. gigantea migration between the continents is unlikely and that strains should not be transferred between continents for biocontrol purposes in order to avoid the introduction of novel genotypes.
S461	G. Vandemark;O. Martínez;V. Pecina;M. Alvarado	2000	Assessment of genetic relationships among isolates of Macrophomina phaseolina using a simplified AFLP technique and two different methods of analysis	Mycologia	92	4	656-664		http://www.jstor.org/stable/3761423	agarose gel electrophoresis; genetic distance; genetic similarity; selective primers 	A simplified protocol for detecting amplified restriction fragment length polymorphisms (AFLPs) was used to evaluate genetic diversity among isolates of Macrophomina phaseolina collected from different hosts and locations. Fifteen different selective primer pairs were evaluated. No significant differences were observed among primer pairs, grouped based on the AT% of the selective nucleotides, for several parameters that define primer utility. Relationship matrices generated with each group of AFLP primers were highly correlated (r^2 > 0.92). Isolates were very diverse and could not clearly be grouped based on the geographic locations from which they were obtained. Genetic relationships among isolates were very robust. Relationships were determined using both the 'genetic similarity' method of Nei and Li and the 'genetic distance' method of Skroch. We conclude that both methods are equally effective for determining intraspecific genetic relationships when the majority of markers are polymorphic.
S631	J. L. Anderson;W. Chen;C. A. Shearer	2001	Phylogeny of Halosarpheia based on 18S rDNA	Mycologia	93	5	897-906		http://www.jstor.org/stable/3761755	appendages; aquatic; Ascomycetes; Halosphaeriales; rDNA; systematics	Species of Halosarpheia, a genus of aquatic Ascomycetes, are morphologically unified by the presence of unfurling ascospore appendages. This character state may be unreliable for resolving evolutionary relationships, however, due to its likely adaptive nature. Taxonomic emphasis on unfurling ascospore appendages has led to the inclusion of species within Halosarpheia that are morphologically similar enough to confound identification, as well as those distinct enough to question their placement in the genus. Phylogenetic analyses of 18S rDNA sequences demonstrate polyphyly of the genus, with H. fibrosa, the type of the genus, resolved separately from all other species of Halosarpheia analyzed. Morphologically similar species H. retorquens, H. viscosa, H. heteroguttulata, and H. lotica are distinct species separable by RFLP analysis of the ITS1 region as well as 18S rDNA sequence analyses. Some morphological characters used to delineate species within Halosarpheia, such as ascospore guttulation pattern and number of ascospore appendages, may actually reflect generic differences that have been overshadowed by convergent evolution in appendage type.
S628	M. Binder;D. S. Hibbett;H. P. Molitoris	2001	Phylogenetic relationships of the marine gasteromycete Nia vibrissa	Mycologia	93	4	679-688		http://www.jstor.org/stable/3761822	cyphelloid fungi; Fistulina hepatica; Henningsomyces candidus; marine fungi; molecular systematics; Schizophyllum commune	Phylogenetic relationships of the marine gasteromycete, Nia vibrissa, were investigated using four ribosomal DNA (rDNA) regions. Independent analyses of mitochondrial small-subunit (mt-ssu) rDNA, mitochondrial large subunit (mt-lsu) rDNA, nuclear small-subunit (nuc-ssu) rDNA, and nuclear large subunit (nuc-lsu) rDNA all suggest that Nia vibrissa is in the euagarics clade. The mt-lsu, nuc-ssu, and nuc-lsu datasets suggest that Nia vibrissa is closely related to the cyphelloid fungus, Henningsomyces candidus, but in all three datasets the monophyly of the Nia-Henningsomyces group is weakly supported. Analyses of mt-ssu rDNA suggest that the sister group of Nia vibrissa is Schizophyllum commune, but again the relationship is weakly supported. A combined analysis of all four rDNA regions strongly supports the sister group relationship of Nia vibrissa and Henningsomyces candidus. Schizophyllum commune and Fistulina hepatica form a strongly supported clade that is weakly supported as the sister group of the Nia-Henningsomyces clade. Schizophyllum commune and Fistulina hepatica both resemble cyphelloid fungi in some aspects of their hymenophore morphology, and it is plausible that they could be closely related to Henningsomyces candidus. Eighteen genera of terrestrial gasteromycetes were included in the analyses, but none are closely related to Nia vibrissa, which therefore represents an independent origin of the gasteroid habit in the homobasidiomycetes.
S719	P. Chaverri;G. J. Samuels;E. L. Stewart	2001	Hypocrea virens sp. nov., the teleomorph of Trichoderma virens	Mycologia	93	6	1113-1124		http://www.jstor.org/stable/3761672	Ascomycetes; biological control; Hypocreales; systematics; teleomorph-anamorph connection 	The new species Hypocrea virens, has been found to be the teleomorph of Trichoderma virens, a species commonly used in biological control applications. This conclusion is based on the comparison of morphological and molecular data from four isolates of T. virens and a single collection and isolate of H. virens. Data for several morphological characters, including colony and growth characteristics, were collected. In addition, sequence data from ITS1, 5.8S, ITS2 rDNA and translation elongation factor (tef-1É—) were analyzed for the five isolates. Analysis of phenotypic characters show that cultures and microscopic characters of the anamorph of H. virens are indistinguishable from those of T. virens. This is consistent with sequence data from ITS1, 5.8S, ITS2 rDNA which show that the sequence of H. virens is identical to that of the ex-type isolate of T. virens. Despite minor in tef-1É— sequences, T. virens isolates and H. virens form a monophyletic group that is different from other examined species of Hypocrea; this clade is supported by a 100% bootstrap value. Molecular and morphological data confirm the connection between H. virens and T. virens.
S569	M. P. A. Coetzee;B. D. Wingfield;P. Bloomer;G. S. Ridley;G. A. Kile;M. J. Wingfield	2001	Phylogenetic relationships of Australian and New Zealand Armillaria species	Mycologia	93	5	887-896		http://www.jstor.org/stable/3761754	Armillaria; evolution; ITS; phylogeny 	Armillaria species cause Armillaria root rot on a wide range of plant species throughout the world. Based on morphology and sexual compatibility, various species of Armillaria have been reported from Australia and New Zealand. These include A. hinnulea, A. fumosa, A. pallidula, A. novae-zelandiae and A. luteobubalina from Australia. In New Zealand, A. limonea, A. novae-zelandiae, A. hinnulea and a fourth undescribed but morphologically distinct species are recognized. To determine the phylogenetic relationships between Armillaria spp. from Australia and New Zealand, the ITS region (ITS 1, 5.8S rRNA gene and ITS2) of the rRNA operon was amplified and the DNA sequences determined for a collection of isolates. The ITS sequences of A. ostoyae (from USA) and A. sinapina (from USA) were included for comparison. Phylogenetic trees were generated using parsimony analysis. Armillaria hinnulea was found to be more closely related to Armillaria spp. occurring in the Northern Hemisphere than it was to the other Australian and New Zealand species. The remainder of the Australian and New Zealand Armillaria spp. included in this study formed a monophyletic clade and confirmed separation of species based on morphology and sexual compatibility.
S583	J. Collado;G. Platas;F. Peláez	2001	Identification of an endophytic Nodulisporium sp. from Quercus ilex in Central Spain as the anamorph of Biscogniauxia mediterranea by rDNA sequence analysis and effect of different ecological factors on distribution of the fungus	Mycologia	93	5	875-886		http://www.jstor.org/stable/3761753	distribution patterns; fungal endophytes; Hypoxylon mediterraneum; ITS sequences; Periconiella-like; Xylariaceae	A study of fungal endophytes from aerial parts of Quercus ilex ssp. ballota was carried out on 32 specimens sampled at three forests in Central Spain. Trunk bark, fresh leaves, and healthy and decaying twigs were surveyed. A Nodulisporium sp. was frequently recorded among the isolates. Sequence analysis of the internal transcribed spacer (ITS) region of the rDNA (including the 5.8S rRNA gene) was used for the identification of this fungus. The comparison and phylogenetic analysis of the sequences from several representatives of this endophytic species and a group of xylariaceous fungi with Nodulisporium-like anamorphs revealed that the endophytic Nodulisporium sp. was conspecific with the phytopathogenic species Biscogniauxia mediterranea (≡ Hypoxylon mediterraneum). Significant differences were found between the isolation frequencies of the fungus, relative to the geographical origin of the samples. Also, the fungus was more frequent on samples collected in the autumn, as compared to those collected in the spring. The greatest degree of colonization was observed in twigs, while in leaves the fungus was present in significantly lower amounts. The relative frequency of this species in bark increased in the higher parts of the trunk. Tissue preference analysis revealed that this fungal species is exclusively located in bark, being absent from xylem of living twigs. The relative abundance of the fungus in decaying twigs was remarkably higher than in healthy twigs.
S590	P. W. Crous;J. C. Kang;U. Braun	2001	A phylogenetic redefinition of anamorph genera in Mycosphaerella based on ITS rDNA sequence and morphology	Mycologia	93	6	1081-1101		http://www.jstor.org/stable/3761670	Cercospora; Cladosporium; Mycosphaerella; Mycovellosiella; Passalora; Pseudocercospora; ITS phylogeny 	Anamorph genera associated with Mycosphaerella are separated on a combination of characters such as conidiomatal structure, the nature and arrangement of conidiophores, conidiogenesis, dehiscence scars and pigmentation. To date 27 genera have been reported as anamorphs of Mycosphaerella, 19 of which were included in this study. Based on the phylogeny of the ITS1, 5.8S, and ITS2 rDNA sequence data, Mycosphaerella proved to be monophyletic. The major group consisted of several small clusters correlating to specific anamorph genera, as well as other clusters containing an assemblage of anamorph genera. Although Mycosphaerella is monophyletic, it appears that many of the morphological characters defining different anamorph genera evolved more than once and for the most part do not represent true groups within Mycosphaerella. Nevertheless, the anamorph generic concepts contain valuable information of practical use to plant pathologists and mycologists working with these organisms. Based on these results, as well as a re-evaluation of the criteria upon which anamorph genera are distinguished in this complex, a reduced set of informative criteria and genera are proposed. The degree of scar thickening, darkening and refraction, as well as the presence or absence of pigmentation in conidiophores and conidia still appear to be useful features delimiting anamorph genera of Mycosphaerella.
S599	D. S. Gernandt;J. L. Platt;J. K. Stone;J. W. Spatafora;A. Holst-Jensen;R. C. Hamelin;L. M. Kohn	2001	Phylogenetics of Helotiales and Rhytismatales based on partial small subunit nuclear ribosomal DNA sequences	Mycologia	93	5	915-933		http://www.jstor.org/stable/3761757	apothecium; inoperculate discomycete; small subunit nrDNA	The evolutionary sequence leading to the differentiation of ascomatal and ascal types in the Euascomycetes remains poorly understood. To investigate the placement of the inoperculate discomycetes in the phylogeny of Euascomycetes, partial small subunit ribosomal DNA sequences for 36 species placed in Helotiales and Rhytismatales were combined with those of 54 additional species representing the major ascomycete lineages, and two basidiomycetes as outgroups. The apothecial orders Helotiales, Rhytismatales, Pezizales, Caliciales, Lecanorales, and Peltigerales were represented by multiple genera. Maximum parsimony recovered over 100 000 equally most parsimonious trees, with the strict consensus tree collapsing many inoperculate discomycetes into a large Euascomycete polytomy. Weighted parsimony resolved a paraphyletic clade composed of Rhytismatales and Helotiales. Families grouping consistently in the Helotiales/Rhytismatales clade included Bulgariaceae, Helotiaceae, Hemiphacidiaceae, Leotiaceae, Loramycetaceae, Phacidiaceae, Rhytismataceae, Rutstroemiaceae, Sclerotiniaceae, and Thelebolaceae. Orbiliaceae did not group with Helotiales. The small subunit data matrix was more useful for familial relationships in Helotiales and Rhytismatales. Of families represented by multiple taxa, Sclerotiniaceae and Hemiphacidiaceae were monophyletic, Rhytismataceae was paraphyletic, and Helotiaceae and Phacidiaceae were polyphyletic. The placement of several inoperculate discomycete genera with historically problematic ordinal or familial placement based on morphological and developmental features remained equivocal in the small subunit phylogeny. These genera include Cyclaneusma, Darkera, Gremmeniella, Naemacyclus, Phacidium, and Piceomphale. Although further studies are needed, we use the small subunit phylogeny as a framework for discussing the evolution of the ascoma and ascus, the delimitation between Helotiales and Rhytismatales, and certain family concepts within the inoperculate discomycetes.
S609	S. B. Goodwin;V. L. Zismann	2001	Phylogenetic analyses of the ITS region of ribosomal DNA reveal that Septoria passerinii from barley is closely related to the wheat pathogen Mycosphaerella graminicola	Mycologia	93	5	934-946		http://www.jstor.org/stable/3761758	Dothideales; ITS1; ITS2; Pleosporales; 5.8S ribosomal DNA; Septoria tritici; speckled leaf blotch	Septoria passerinii, a mitosporic ascomycete, causes speckled leaf blotch of barley. Although this fungus has been known to science for more than 120 years, no teleomorph has been found and its phylogenetic relationships are not known. On the basis of spore morphology and growth characteristics in culture, S. passerinii appears similar to Septoria tritici, the anamorph of the wheat pathogen Mycosphaerella graminicola. To test the hypothesis that S. passerinii and M. graminicola are closely related, the internal transcribed spacer (ITS) region (ITS1, ITS2 and the intervening 5.8S rRNA gene) of both species was sequenced and compared to those of many other fungi in the Dothideales and Pleosporales of the Loculoascomycetes. Two ITS sequences were identified among seven isolates of S. passerinii. Six isolates from cultivated barley (Hordeum vulgare) shared the same 569 base-pair sequence. One isolate from the wild barley H. jubatum had a 569 base-pair sequence that differed from the first sequence by seven nucleotides. The ITS sequence of M. graminicola differed from those of both forms of S. passerinii by 10 nucleotides. These differences were large enough that all three ITS sequences could be distinguished by restriction enzyme digestion of polymerase chain reaction-amplified products. Cluster analyses revealed that both forms of S. passerinii were closely related to M. graminicola and were contained within a large, monophyletic group of Mycosphaerella species. This confirms that the teleomorph of S. passerinii, if it exists, must be a Mycosphaerella. Furthermore, the isolate from H. jubatum probably represents a new, undescribed species that is separated from S. passerinii by host specificity. Our analysis also revealed the phylogenetic relationships of the halophilic black yeasts Trimmatostroma salinum and Phaeotheca triangularis within Mycosphaerella and of Rhizopycnis vagum within the Pleosporales. The Pleosporalean genera Leptosphaeria and Phaeosphaeria were apparently polyphyletic, as were most of the anamorph genera in both the Pleosporales and Dothideales. Pathogenicity to the same host occurred in phylogenetically distinct species, indicating convergent evolution for host specificity. Large differences in size of the ITS1 region made alignment difficult; within the Dothideales and Pleosporales, the best phylogenetic analyses were obtained with ITS2 sequences.
S499	A. M. Gottlieb;R. W. Lichtwardt	2001	Molecular variation within and between species of Harpellales (Trichomycetes)	Mycologia	93	1	65-80		http://www.jstor.org/stable/3761606	18S rDNA; ITS; phylogeny; RFLP; Smittium; Trichomycetes; Zygomycota	Intra- and interspecific variation of the nuclear ribosomal internal transcribed spacers (ITS) of 77 Smittium isolates and related genera was studied using RFLP. Due to the sequence and length variation encountered, the ITS is unsuitable for comparison at the species level within Smittium, as presently delimited. Intra- and interspecific variation of 18S rDNA was also analyzed. Cladistic analysis of 32 new 18S rDNA sequences resolved at least five lineages and suggests that Smittium is not monophyletic. In addition, 17 18S rDNA sequences from 5 orders of Zygomycota were included to assess phylogenetic relationships with the Trichomycetes. The kickxellid origin of Trichomycetes was not strongly supported.
S514	L. C. Grubisha;J. M. Trappe;R. Molina;J. W. Spatafora	2001	Biology of the ectomycorrhizal genus Rhizopogon. V. Phylogenetic relationships in the Boletales inferred from LSU rDNA sequences	Mycologia	93	1	82-89		http://www.jstor.org/stable/3761607	Alpova; Melanogaster; phylogeny; Rhizopogonaceae; Suillus	The phylogenetic relationship between Alpova, Chroogomphus, Gomphidius, Rhizopogon, Suillus, and Truncocolumella and their placement in the Boletales was tested through maximum parsimony analyses of large subunit nuclear ribosomal DNA sequences. Taxon sampling included representatives of the genera Alpova, Boletellus, Boletus, Chroogomphus, Gomphidius, Melanogaster, Paragyrodon, Phylloporus, Rhizopogon, Suillus, Truncocolumella, Tylopilus, and Xerocomus, as well as species from the Agaricales, Russulales, and Polyporales. The order Boletales was strongly supported as monophyletic. Furthermore, within this order, two major groups emerged: the boletoid radiation and a Melanogastraceae/Paragyrodon sphaerosporus paraphyletic assemblage, and the suilloid radiation. The boletoid radiation and a Melanogastraceae/Paragyrodon sphaerosporus assemblage was strongly supported. Although the boletoid radiation was not strongly supported by bootstrap analysis, the clade did not collapse in the strict consensus topology. This clade comprised species from the genera Boletellus, Boletus, Phylloporus, Tylopilus, and Xerocomus. The Boletaceae sensu Singer was not monophyletic. Although species relationships within the boletoid radiation were not well resolved, the genus Boletus did not appear to be monophyletic. Alpova diplophloeus, A. trappei, Melanogaster tuberiformis, and Paragyrodon sphaerosporus formed a paraphyletic assemblage basal to the boletoid radiation clade. The suilloid clade was strongly supported and included Alpova olivaceotinctus, Chroogomphus, Gomphidius, Rhizopogon, Suillus and Truncocolumella citrina. Species in the genus Alpova therefore were grouped both within and outside the suilloid radiation. Within the suilloid radiation, Suillus was inferred to be more closely related to Truncocolumella citrina and the Gomphidiaceae than to Rhizopogon, suggesting a more distant relationship between Suillus and Rhizopogon than previously hypothesized. Rhizopogon was not supported as monophyletic, although its monophyly could not be rejected by the data. Alpova olivaceotinctus grouped within the genus Rhizopogon, consistent with previous classifications, and is returned to that genus.
S527	R. A. Haugland;S. J. Vesper;S. M. Harmon	2001	Phylogenetic relationships of Memnoniella and Stachybotrys species and evaluation of morphological features for Memnoniella species identification	Mycologia	93	1	54-65		http://www.jstor.org/stable/3761605	morphology; phylogenetic analysis; rDNA; taxonomy	Members of the anamorphic fungal genus Memnoniella demonstrate morphological and biological similarities to species within the genus Stachybotrys, and the taxonomic distinctions between the genera have been the subject of controversy in the past. Sixteen strains representing described species of Memnoniella were examined for morphology using light and scanning electron microscopy and for phylogenetic relationship using comparative sequence analysis of a segment of the nuclear ribosomal RNA gene operon (rDNA) including the internal transcribed spacer 1 and 2 regions (ITS1 and ITS2) and 5.8S gene. These analyses resolved the Memnoniella strains into two highly divergent phylogenetic clades with morphologies generally consistent with the current descriptions of M. echinata and M. subsimplex. One strain, showing morphological features more similar to M. subsimplex, was placed in the M. echinata clade in the phylogenetic analysis and probably represents a new species. A second strain, showing a typical M. echinata DNA sequence, showed morphological features that were similar to Stachybotrys species when grown on certain culture media. The evolutionary relationships between the genera were evaluated by phylogenetic analyses of sequence data from the 18S, 28S, 5.8S rDNA genes and ITS1 and ITS2 regions. Results of several different analyses were in agreement in indicating that Memnoniella is paraphyletic to Stachybotrys.
S832	G. Heredia;M. Reyes;R. M. Aria;G. F. Bills	2001	Talaromyces ocotl sp. nov. and observations on T. rotundus from conifer forest soils of Veracruz State, Mexico	Mycologia	93	3	528-540		http://www.jstor.org/stable/3761738	ascomycetes; internal transcribed spacers; molecular phylogeny; rDNA sequencing; Sagenomella; soil fungi; Trichocomaceae 	Two unusual Talaromyces species were encountered by using heat and chemical pasteurization techniques to survey soil fungi in Pinus hartwegii and Pinus patula forests of the Volcanic Cordillera of Veracruz state, Mexico. Talaromyces ocotl is described as a new species based on morphological analyses and phylogenetic inferences made from ITS and 28S rDNA sequence alignments. The geographic range of Talaromyces rotundus is extended to Mexico and its relationship to other Talaromyces species is investigated based on ITS sequence alignments.
S588	S. M. Huhndorf;F. A. Fernández;J. E. Taylor;K. D. Hyde	2001	Two pantropical Ascomycetes: Chaetosphaeria cylindrospora sp. nov. and Rimaconus, a new genus for Lasiosphaeria jamaicensis	Mycologia	93	6	1072-1080		http://www.jstor.org/stable/3761669	Chaetosphaeriaceae; Lasiosphaeriaceae; Sordariales; systematics	Chaetosphaeria cylindrospora and Rimaconus, a new genus for Lasiosphaeria jamaicensis, are described and illustrated. The ascomata of Chaetosphaeria cylindrospora are gregarious, globose to broadly ovoid and superficial on the substrate, with robust walls of strong structural integrity. The asci of C. cylindrospora are clavate and long-stipitate and the ascospores are cylindrical, hyaline, and multiseptate. No anamorph was formed in culture and an associated anamorph was found on only a single specimen. In parsimony analyses of partial sequences of the large subunit nrDNA, placement of C. cylindrospora within the genus Chaetosphaeria is well supported with high bootstrap values. Rimaconus jamaicensis has conical, immersed to erumpent, melanized ascomata, cylindrical, short-stipitate asci with a refractive apex and hyaline, cylindrical, multiseptate ascospores that are bent at slightly submedian. No anamorph was formed in culture. Family placement is unclear according to analyses of sequences of the large subunit nrDNA, however, it did not show affinities either to Lasiosphaeria ovina or other members of the Sordariales sensu stricto. Based on morphological characters it is placed in the Pleurotremataceae.
S544	J. K. Jin;K. W. Hughes;R. H. Petersen	2001	Biogeographical patterns in Panellus stypticus	Mycologia	93	2	309-316		http://www.jstor.org/stable/3761652	Agaricales; Basidiomycota; Dictyopanus pusillus; group I intron; ITS; ribosomal genes; RFLP; Tricholomataceae 	Panellus stypticus fruits widely in Northern Hemisphere temperate forests but has also been collected in Alaska, Costa Rica, Australia and New Zealand. Previous studies established that there was a single biological species across eastern North America, Russia, Japan and New Zealand. In order to examine phylogenetic and biogeographical patterns within this species, the ribosomal ITS1-5.8S-ITS2 region was amplified for 67 collections representing North America, Eurasia, Australia and New Zealand and was sequenced for ten exemplars selected from different geographical areas. The amplified ITS sequence length for collections from New South Wales and Tasmania (Australia) and New Zealand was consistent within each of these geographical areas but varied between areas and was shorter than the ITS region for Northern Hemisphere collections. Length changes were due to a number of deletions. Deleted regions totaled 15 bp in collections from New South Wales, 29 bp from Tasmania and 88 bp from New Zealand. Parsimony analysis based on ITS sequences produced two major clades, a Northern Hemisphere clade and an Oceanian clade. The collection from New South Wales was basal to the Oceanian clade with collections from Tasmania and New Zealand as derived. Restriction fragment length polymorphisms based on BstZ I, Dra I and Hinf I identified several biogeographically separated haplotypes within this species. In the Northern Hemisphere, an eastern North American haplotype was separated from other P. stypticus collections that extended from Pacific North America to Asia. European collections also shared a unique haplotype. The presence of a nuclear ribosomal large subunit group I intron was inferred in all Northern Hemisphere collections and in collections from New South Wales by length variation of the PCR product and by sequencing of selected exemplars. ITS sequence data and the presence of a group I intron in the Northern Hemisphere and New South Wales collections provide evidence that Northern Hemisphere and Southern Hemisphere distributions were connected through South East Asia.
S541	K. W. Ko;H. S. Jung;L. Ryvarden	2001	Phylogenetic relationships of Hapalopilus and related genera inferred from mitochondrial small subunit ribosomal DNA sequences	Mycologia	93	2	270-276		http://www.jstor.org/stable/3761648	Aphyllophorales; Lopharia; Phanerochaete; Polyporaceae; Porostereum; polyporic acid; Sarcoporia	To elucidate the evolution of Hapalopilus and related genera, partial mitochondrial small subunit ribosomal DNAs of 13 species were sequenced and phylogenetically analyzed. Both neighbor-joining and parsimony trees showed that species with polyporic acid have evolved several times and that Hapalopilus, Lopharia, Porostereum and Phanerochaete were all polyphyletic. The main Hapalopilus group consisted of four species of Hapalopilus and Porostereum friesii, while Hapalopilus salmonicolor (= Sarcoporia salmonicolor) came out close to the species of Irpex and Oxyporus and proved to be a distinct taxon.
S601	D. Krüeger;M. Binder;M. Fischer;H. Kreisel	2001	The Lycoperdales. A molecular approach to the systematics of some gasteroid mushrooms	Mycologia	93	5	947-957		http://www.jstor.org/stable/3761759	Basidiomycotina; Bovistella; Calvatia; capillitium; gasteromycetes; Geastrum; Lycoperdon; Morganella; Mycenastrum; Myriostoma; Vascellum	Based on selected taxa of Lycoperdales and Geastrales, phylogeny and delimitation of several gasteroid mushroom genera were investigated using RFLP and sequence analysis of 18S rDNA and ITS rDNA (ITS1-5.8S-ITS2). Support for an Agaricales-Lycoperdales relationship was found, the Geastrales being clearly separated from this lineage. Within the Lycoperdales, Lycoperdon was found to be polyphyletic, whereas Bovista appeared to be monophyletic.
S614	S. Landvik;O. E. Eriksson;M. L. Berbee	2001	Neolecta—a fungal dinosaur? Evidence from β-tubulin amino acid sequences	Mycologia	93	6	1151-1163		http://www.jstor.org/stable/3761675	filamentous ascomycetes; fungal evolution; introns; paralogues; yeasts	Were the first ascomycetes yeast-like (unicellular) or filamentous with complex multicellular growth? Molecular studies have indicated that the earliest lineages of ascomycetes were mostly yeast-like and without complex, multicellular fruit bodies. The genus Neolecta stands out as an exception. Neolecta spp. have filamentous growth and discomycete-type of fruit bodies, but constitute one of the basal lineages both in rRNA and RPB2 gene trees. In this paper, we have used 10 previously unpublished and 30 GenBank β-tubulin genes to test the phylogenetic position of Neolecta spp. We compared the phylogenetic information from the amino acid sequences (485 characters) with the phylogenetic information content of 33 characters from intron gains and losses. Due to gene duplications, two paralogous versions of β-tubulin genes occurred in four species included in our analysis. Although phylogenetic interpretation of β-tubulin gene trees was complicated by a history of gene duplications, intron gains and losses, and by unequal rates of amino acid substitution, Neolecta species never formed a monophyletic group with any of the sequences from the filamentous ascomycetes in the Pezizomycotina (euascomycetes) in parsimony or distance analyses. Like the RPB2 and rRNA genes, the β-tubulin genes support the hypotheses of an early divergence of Neolecta from superficially similar filamentous ascomycetes. Neolecta could become a key taxon particularly in comparative studies between the fungal model organisms in the mainly unicellular (=yeast-like) taxa Saccharomyces and Schizosaccharomyces and the filamentous fruit-body forming taxa Neurospora and Aspergillus.
S584	E. Larsson;N. Hallenberg	2001	Species delimitation in the Gloeocystidiellum porosum-clavuligerum complex inferred from compatibility studies and nuclear rDNA sequence data	Mycologia	93	5	907-914		http://www.jstor.org/stable/3761756	Gloeocystidiellum clavuligerum; Gloeocystidiellum porosum; Homobasidiomycetes; ITS; nuc-lsu rDNA; species complex	Gloeocystidiellum porosum and Gloeocystidiellum clavuligerum are corticioid homobasidiomycetes with minor morphological differences and are generally regarded as a complex of closely related taxa. To infer phylogenetic relationships and to aid in species delimitation, sequences of the internal transcribed spacer 2 and the 5′ end of the large sub-unit nuclear ribosomal DNA were obtained for 25 representatives of the species complex. Inter- and intracompatibility tests between cultured representatives for all specimen groups were performed. Results of phylogenetic analyses based on DNA sequences were congruent with compatibility results. Gloeocystidiellum clavuligerum consists of two distinct taxa, and G. porosum includes at least two intersterile groups of uncertain taxonomic status.
S533	C. A. Leander;D. Porter	2001	The Labyrinthulomycota is comprised of three distinct lineages	Mycologia	93	3	459-464		http://www.jstor.org/stable/3761732	Diplophrys marina; evolution; heterokont; labyrinthula; QPX; stramenopile; thraustochytrid; zoosporic fungi 	The labyrinthulids and thraustochytrids, identified by the presence of bothrosomes and the associated ectoplasmic net, are marine saprobes classified as stramenopiles in the kingdom Protista. We have sequenced a partial ssurDNA region for 10 isolates in five genera, including Diplophrys marina(a possible labyrinthulid relative which lacks bothrosomes). We also include sequences of two isolates of the northern quahog pathogen, QPX, a thraustochytrid of uncertain taxonomic affinities. Our ssurDNA sequence analysis indicates that members of the Labyrinthulomycota fall into three phylogenetic groups. These groups correspond to the three morphological extremes found within the phylum; the labyrinthulids, the thraustochytirds, and the labyrinthuloids. QPX sequences support its inclusion as a thraustochytrid. Diplophrys marina also appears to show phylogenetic affinity with the thraustochytrids. Key Words: Diplophrys marina, QPX, stramenopile, thraustochytrid, labyrinthula, evolution, heterokont, zoosporic fungi
S591	J. L. Mata;R. H. Petersen;K. W. Hughes	2001	The genus Lentinula in the Americas	Mycologia	93	6	1102-1112		http://www.jstor.org/stable/3761671		Recent studies have reported only Lentinula boryana and L. guarapiensis from the American continent, the latter known only from its type specimen. We report at least three extant species. Two widely distributed species, L. boryana and L. raphanica comb. nov., are discussed in this paper, and a new species is being described elsewhere. The geographic ranges of both species apparently overlap throughout tropical and subtropical America except for the Gulf Coast region of the United States, from which only L. raphanica can be reported. Lentinula boryana and L. raphanica differ in basidiome micromorphology, especially cheilocystidial form, spore dimensions, sexual compatibility profiles, and ITS sequences.
S816	S. L. Miller;T. M. McClean;J. F. Walker;B. Buyck	2001	A molecular phylogeny of the Russulales including agaricoid, gasteroid and pleurotoid taxa	Mycologia	93	2	344-354		http://www.jstor.org/stable/3761656	Basidiomycetes; large subunit rDNA; Russuloid lineage	The Russulales consists of agaricoid, gasteroid and hypogeous gasteroid taxa of basidiomycetes closely related to Russula and Lactarius. Because there have been no molecular phylogenetic studies of the Russulales, attempts at formulating a natural classification for these taxa have met with difficulty. In this study, nuclear large subunit rDNA (n-LSU) was used to infer phylogenetic relationships among members of the Russulales including agaricoid, tropical pleurotoid and annulate taxa, and gasteroid and hypogeous gasteroid genera. Analysis of the n-LSU region indicated that Russula sensu strictu (excluding gasteroid and hypogeous gasteroid taxa) can be considered polyphyletic with two well supported groups, one group arising separately from the main body of the tree and one group basal to Lactarius. Russula sensu lato can be considered paraphyletic with gasteroid and hypogeous gasteroid forms nested in the same clades alongside agaricoid taxa. Lactarius sensu lato was found to be a monophyletic group that includes agaricoid, gasteroid and hypogeous gasteroid taxa. Gasteroid and hypogeous gasteroid genera were scattered throughout the order, with Macowanites, Gymnomyces, Cystangium and Martellia nested within Russula, while Zelleromyces and Arcangeliella grouped within Lactarius. Most of the gasteroid and hypogeous gasteroid genera appear to be polyphyletic and their position was supported within established infrageneric taxa of Russula and Lactarius. These results suggested that synonomy of gasteroid genera into Russula and Lactarius is justifiable.
S515	L. Mostert;P. W. Crous;J. C. Kang;A. J. L. Phillips	2001	Species of Phomopsis and a Libertella sp. occurring on grapevines with specific reference to South Africa: morphological, cultural, molecular and pathological characterization	Mycologia	93	1	146-167		http://www.jstor.org/stable/3761612	Diaporthe; Phomopsis cane and leaf spot; Phomopsis viticola; systematics	Phomopsis viticola is the cause of Phomopsis cane and leaf spot disease of grapevines. In the present study, 61 isolates were collected from 58 different vineyards in the vine growing areas of the Western Cape province of South Africa. Four different taxa have previously been associated with grapevines in Australia. Three of the latter taxa, and a Phomopsis species commonly associated with shoot blight of peaches in the U.S.A., P. amygdali, were identified among the South African isolates. Examination of the Australian culture designated as taxon 4 revealed it to be a species of Libertella, thus excluding it from the P. viticola-complex. An Italian isolate was found to represent a species of Phomopsis not previously known from grapevines, and this was subsequently described as taxon 5. Species delimitation was primarily based on alpha conidium and conidiophore morphology, cultural characteristics, pathogenicity to Vitis, and the ability to form the teleomorph in vitro. The identity of each taxon was confirmed by means of phylogenetic analyses of the nuclear ribosomal DNA internal transcribed spacers (5.8S, ITS1 and ITS2) and the 5' end partial sequence of the mitochondrial small subunit (mtSSU). P. amygdali was isolated once only and appeared to be of lesser importance in this disease complex. Furthermore, taxa 1 (D. perjuncta) and 3 were also rarely encountered and proved to be non-pathogenic, indicating their non-functional role in Phomopsis cane and leaf spot disease. Taxon 2 (Phomopsis viticola) was common and widely distributed throughout diseased vineyards. This taxon was associated with the typical cane and leaf spot disease symptoms and proved to be highly virulent. Morphologically taxon 2 corresponded best with P. viticola, which was also neotypified in this study.
S542	L. Myllys;K. Lohtander;A. Tehler	2001	β-tubulin, ITS and group I intron sequences challenge the species pair concept in Physcia aipolia and P. caesia	Mycologia	93	2	335-343		http://www.jstor.org/stable/3761655	Ascomycetes; cryptic species; evolution; genetic marker; Lecanorales; lichenized fungi; parsimony jackknifer	ITS, group I intron and partial β-tubulin sequences were used to infer phylogenies of a putative lichen species pair: Physcia aipolia (sexual) and P. caesia (asexual). A jackknife tree obtained from the β-tubulin sequences produced a well-resolved tree, whereas the resolution in the group I intron and in the ITS tree was lower due to homoplasy. The results obtained from the combined group I intron, ITS and β-tubulin data indicate that neither P. caesia nor P. aipolia are monophyletic and suggest that the two taxa are conspecific. Although the combined DNA data suggest the existence of several genetically isolated lineages in the P. aipolia/caesia group, the different lineages were not correlated with any morphological characters. Within one of the lineages, the incongruent placement of one P. aipolia specimen may indicate sexual recombination. A contradictory placement of one P. caesia specimen in different trees suggests that the usually asexual P. caesia is occasionally capable of sexual reproduction. The β-tubulin gene was found to contain enough variation for inferring relationships at the species level. Most of the informative characters were found from intron sequences and third codon positions in the exon regions. All the nucleotide substitutions were synonymous.
S617	K. Nielsen;D. S. Yohalem	2001	Origin of a polyploid Botrytis pathogen through interspecific hybridization between Botrytis aclada and B. byssoidea	Mycologia	93	6	1064-1071		http://www.jstor.org/stable/3761668	Botryotinia; Botrytis cinerea; Botrytis squamosa; fungal hybrid species; speciation	Botrytis aclada has previously been divided into two subgroups (AI and AII) based on spore size, chromosome number and genetic markers. A recent study of genetic diversity using universal-primed PCR (UP-PCR) fingerprints showed that subgroup AII of B. aclada was a possible hybrid species between B. byssoidea and subgroup AI of B. aclada. To test this hypothesis, we sequenced a UP-PCR fragment (∼550 bp) from representative isolates of four Botrytis species, all causing disease on onions. A mixture of two nucleotides at each nucleotide position was found in all AII isolates analyzed at 23 positions in the sequence. These isolates had 32 chromosomes, whereas all AI isolates had 16 chromosomes. Pair-wise comparison of the sequences of the four Botrytis species showed that a hybridization event between B. aclada (AI) and B. byssoidea could explain all 23 positions with mixed nucleotides, supporting them as being parental ancestors to AII. These results indicate that at least one Botrytis pathogen has evolved through interspecific hybridization.
S528	K. O'Donnell;F. M. Lutzoni;T. J. Ward;G. L. Benny	2001	Evolutionary relationships among mucoralean fungi (Zygomycota): Evidence for family polyphyly on a large scale	Mycologia	93	2	286-297		http://www.jstor.org/stable/3761650	phylogeny; rDNA; systematics; translation elongation factor	Mucorales (Zygomycota) are ubiquitous, morphologically simple terrestrial fungi that are united taxonomically by possession of a coenocytic mycelium upon which nonmotile mitotic spores are produced asexually in uni- to multispored sporangia, and zygospores, where known, are produced following fusion of sexually compatible hyphae. Here we report the first comprehensive phylogenetic analysis of essentially all genera of Mucorales (63 species, 54 genera and 13 families) based on partial nucleotide sequence data of nuclear small subunit (18S) ribosomal RNA and nuclear large subunit (28S) ribosomal RNA genes, translation elongation factor-1α gene exons, and a morphological data set consisting of 1826, 389, 1092 and 11 characters, respectively. Individual and combined data sets were analyzed by unequally weighted maximum parsimony (MP) to investigate evolutionary relationships among and within mucoralean families. A Micromucor-Umbelopsis clade, traditionally included in the Mortierellaceae, was identified as the basal sister-group to all other Mucorales. A major discovery of this study is that traditional family-level classification schemes for this order appear to be highly artificial as evidenced by polyphyly of four of the seven families containing two or more genera. As presently circumscribed, these four families include 83% of the Mucorales. In addition, the largest and best known genera, Mucor and Absidia, were resolved as polyphyletic. The results provide a robust phylogenetic framework for additional evolutionary studies of the Mucorales.
S593	S. W. Peterson;Y. Ito;B. W. Horn;T. Goto	2001	Aspergillus bombycis, a new aflatoxigenic species and genetic variation in its sibling species, A. nomius	Mycologia	93	4	689-703		http://www.jstor.org/stable/3761823	aflatoxin; fungi; molecular systematics; ribosomal DNA sequence	A new aflatoxigenic species of Aspergillus, A. bombycis, was discovered during isolation of fungi from insect frass collected in silkworm rearing houses in Japan. The new species resembles A. flavus, but produces B and G aflatoxins. It is distinguished from A. flavus and A. nomius by differences in growth rates at 37 and 42 C, from A. nomius by roughness of the stipe, and from both of these species by differences in the nucleotide sequences in the beta-tubulin, calmodulin, norsolorinic acid reductase, ITS, and lsu-rDNA genes. Aspergillus bombycis is known from nine isolates, eight collected in silkworm-rearing houses in Japan and one collected in a silk-worm rearing house in Indonesia. Phylogenetic analysis of the DNA sequences shows that A. bombycis is a phylogenetically distinct species which is most closely related to A. nomius and which belongs in Aspergillus section Flavi. Analysis by partition homogeneity did not reveal evidence of genetic recombination in A. bombycis, but in A. nomius the patterns of polymorphisms in different genes strongly suggest cryptic genetic recombination.
S582	J. D. Polishook;J. G. Ondeyka;A. W. Dombrowski;F. Peláez;G. Platas;A. N. Teran	2001	Biogeography and relatedness of Nodulisporium strains producing nodulisporic acid	Mycologia	93	6	1125-1137		http://www.jstor.org/stable/3761673	Hypoxylon; ITS; rDNA sequence; secondary metabolism; Xylariaceae	Nodulisporic acid, a novel indole terpene with insecticidal properties, was first isolated from a fermentation broth of an endophytic Nodulisporium sp. Following an extensive culture screening effort, fermentations of 12 other strains of Nodulisporium also yielded nodulisporic acid. These strains came from a variety of environmental substrata collected from seven tropical regions in four continents. Cultural characteristics and microscopic features show that all the nodulisporic acid-producing Nodulisporium strains are morphologically very similar. AP-PCR and sequencing of the rDNA region consisting of the two internal transcribed spacers and the 5.8S gene revealed that the isolates were distributed into three groups, according to the length of the ITS1. The two groups with the longest sequences were not distinguishable, based on nucleotide divergence data calculated from the common region of ITS1. The group of isolates with shorter sequences showed lower homology with the other groups in the ITS1 region, but those strains could not be distinguished from the other groups, according to ITS2 sequences. These data suggest that the nodulisporic acid producing isolates are very closely related and may constitute a single species, although divided into populations showing some degree of genetic differentiation. Comparison of the sequences obtained in this work with sequences from other xylariaceous fungi with Nodulisporium-type anamorphs failed in determing the teleomorph of the nodulisporic acid-producing Nodulisporium species. However, it revealed that these isolates constitute a monophyletic group, clearly different from other tropical and temperate isolates of Nodulisporium not able to produce nodulisporic acid.
S607	E. J. Pope;D. A. Carter	2001	Phylogenetic placement and host specificity of mycorrhizal isolates belonging to AG-6 and AG-12 in the Rhizoctonia solani species complex	Mycologia	93	4	712-719		http://www.jstor.org/stable/3761825	anastomosis group; mycorrhizae; phylogenetics; seed germination	Rhizoctonia solani isolates belonging to anastomosis group 6 (AG-6) and AG-12 are mycorrhizal with the Australian orchid Pterostylis acuminata. In this study, phylogenetic analyses were conducted using sequences of the ITS (internal transcribed spacer) region of the rRNA gene from all known anastomosis groups of R. solani. The mycorrhizal isolates of AG-6 and AG-12 were placed on independent branches, despite their functional and geographic similarities. The mycorrhizal AG-6 isolates were positioned most closely to the pathogenic AG-6 isolates from Southern Africa. The remaining AG-6 isolates from Japan and the USA were positioned in a distinct and independent cluster, suggesting that various subgroups of AG-6 have evolved independently within R. solani. Germination tests were conducted using AG-6 isolates obtained from pathogenic and saprophytic interactions, as well as isolates belonging to the pathogenic AG 3, 4, 5, 7, and 8. All AG-6 isolates promoted germination of P. acuminata seed, regardless of their origin, although they did so more slowly than the AG-12 isolates. All other AGs either parasitized or disregarded the orchid seed, indicating that the ability to form mycorrhizal interactions is restricted in R. solani. This is the first phylogenetic analysis to include all known AG with a range of host associations and geographic origins including the newly described mycorrhizal AG, and will assist in understanding the evolutionary history and host specificity of this fungus.
S526	J. M. Risède;P. Simoneau	2001	Typing Cylindrocladium species by analysis of ribosomal DNA spacers polymorphism: application to field isolates from the banana rhizosphere	Mycologia	93	3	494-504		http://www.jstor.org/stable/3761735	Calonectria; IGS; ITS; PCR-RFLP; taxonomy	Forty-four unidentified isolates of Cylindrocladium were recovered from banana root lesions and soils from intensive cropping systems in the Caribbean region, Costa Rica and Cameroon. They were then examined and compared with reference isolates using combinations of morphological characters, sexual crosses and polymorphism of amplified rDNA spacers. According to conidium and vesicle morphology, they were consistently classed into two distinct morphotypes, MT1 and MT2. Sequences of PCR products of their internal transcribed spacer (ITS) region compared with similar sequences from reference isolates representing 7 species of Cylindrocladium revealed a very low polymorphism. By contrast, polymorphism in the amplified intergenic spacer region (IGS), as revealed by RFLP analysis, was found to be consistent with the current taxonomy of Cylindrocladium species, and sufficient to distinguish taxa at the inter- and intraspecific level. Using this IGS typing procedure, MT1 field isolates were found to group unequivocally with Cy. gracile, while MT2 isolates grouped with Cy. spathiphylli. The existence of intraspecific variation in the latter species was clearly demonstrated. Reports of these two species from the banana rhizosphere were confirmed by sexual crosses for Cy. spathiphylli, but not for Cy. gracile, which presently has no known teleomorph. IGS-RFLP markers therefore proved to constitute a rapid and suitable complement to morphological and mating studies for delineation of Cylindrocladium species.
S492	M. M. Robison;B. Chiang;P. A. Horgen	2001	A phylogeny of the genus Agaricus based on mitochondrial atp6 sequences	Mycologia	93	1	30-37		http://www.jstor.org/stable/3761603	Basidiomycete; A. bisporus; parsimony; plasmid	The genus Agaricus includes the most economically-important, commercially-cultivated mushroom in the world, A. bisporus. Effective efforts to improve A. bisporus through breeding will require a greater understanding of the evolutionary relationships between A. bisporus and other Agaricus species. We present here the complete mitochondrial atp6 gene of A. bitorquis and amplified homologues from 9 other species of Agaricus, including 6 different isolates of A. bisporus. Unexpectedly, only 2 variants of atp6 were found among the 6 isolates of A. bisporus, which had been chosen to represent mitochondrial types thought to be highly divergent based on RFLP data. Although interspecific variation was high, parsimony and maximum likelihood analyses resulted in identical phylogenetic trees for the genus: A. bisporus, A. subfloccosus and A. subperonatus were tightly clustered as a single subgroup, whereas the remaining species were highly divergent. The species representatives with the closest proximity to the A. bisporus cluster were A. bitorquis and A. campestris, which is in agreement with published phylogenies derived from nuclear sequence data. Incongruency between this mitochondrial gene-based phylogeny and a phylogeny of linear mitochondrial plasmids found in these same species indicates separate evolutionary histories for the plasmids and their host mitochondria.
S521	A. Y. Rossman;J. M. McKemy;R. A. Pardo-Schultheiss;H. J. Schroers	2001	Molecular studies of the Bionectriaceae using large subunit rDNA sequences	Mycologia	93	1	100-110		http://www.jstor.org/stable/3761609	Bionectria; Euascomycetes; Fungi; Hypocreales; Hydropisphaera; 28S rDNA; Kallichroma; molecular phylogeny; Myrothecium; Ochronectria; systematics	Holomorphic species of fifteen genera in the family Bionectriaceae, Hypocreales, and related anamorph species were studied using nuclear large subunit rDNA sequences. Most elements of the Bionectriaceae are shown to form a monophyletic group closely related to representatives of two other families in the Hypocreales, namely the Clavicipitaceae/Hypocreaceae, which is distinct from the Nectriaceae. The genus Bionectria, represented by B. ochroleuca and its anamorph, Clonostachys rosea, and B. cf. aureofulva, appears as a monophyletic lineage that groups with three other species that may also belong to Bionectria. The Bionectria clade is distinct from a second major lineage that includes the perithecial genera Hydropisphaera, Nectriopsis, Ochronectria and Selinia, as well as two cleistothecial genera, Heleococcum and Roumegueriella. Within this lineage the cleistothecial genera, Heleococcum, represented by the nontype species, H. japonense, and the monospecific genus, Roumegueriella, group with the paraphyletic genus Hydropisphaera, including H. peziza, the type species, and H. erubescens. Another lineage includes six cleistothecial genera, namely Bulbithecium, Emericellopsis, Hapsidospora, Leucosphaerina, Mycoarachis, and Nigrosabulum, most of which have Acremonium anamorphs. These genera cluster with the type of Acremonium, A. alternatum, and two anamorph genera, Geosmithia, and Stanjemonium. Both species of Kallichroma, K. tethys and K. glabrum, form a separate lineage within the Bionectriaceae. Kallichroma is the first genus from marine habitats to be confirmed as a member of the Hypocreales. Although classified in the Bionectriaceae based on morphological evidence, species of the tropical genus Peethambara and their Didymostilbe anamorphs and the morphologically similar anamorph genera, Albosynnema and Myrothecium, fall outside of any of the supported clades. These species form a paraphyletic group at the base to the Hypocreaceae/Clavicipitaceae.
S621	D. R. Smith;G. R. Stanosz	2001	Molecular and morphological differentiation of Botryosphaeria dothidea (anamorph Fusicoccum aesculi) from some other fungi with Fusicoccum anamorphs	Mycologia	93	3	505-515		http://www.jstor.org/stable/3761736	Botryosphaeria parva; Botryosphaeria ribis; Fusicoccum luteum; Fusicoccum parvum; nuclear rDNA ITS; RAPD	Differentiation of Botryosphaeria species with Fusicoccum anamorphs has depended on recognition of the anamorphs. This has resulted in some confusion in the taxonomy and our understanding of the pathology of these species because these anamorphs are very similar morphologically and the characters used for differentiation can be influenced by the substrate. We have examined 89 isolates identified by the collectors as B. dothidea (F. aesculi), B. ribis (Fusicoccum sp.), B. parva (F. parvum), or F. luteum. Cluster analysis of random amplified polymorphic DNA (RAPD) marker data identified three distinct groups, which we have designated Bd (probable B. dothidea), Br (probable B. ribis, but including isolates of B. parva), and Fl (probable F. luteum). Analysis of DNA sequence of the nuclear rDNA ITS region from a subset of isolates from each group supports these relationships. Measurement of conidia from a subset of isolates revealed statistically significant differences in shape that can be used to differentiate between conidia of the Bd group isolates and those of the other groups. Conidia of the Br and Fl group isolates, however, were similar. We conclude that B. dothidea can be differentiated from these other fungi with Fusicoccum anamorphs by all three techniques.
S539	H. Smith;P. W. Crous;M. J. Wingfield;T. A. Coutinho;B. D. Wingfield	2001	Botryosphaeria eucalyptorum sp. nov., a new species in the B. dothidea-complex on Eucalyptus in South Africa	Mycologia	93	2	277-285			canker pathogen; endophyte; systematics	Two morphologically similar fungi are associated with canker and die-back of eucalypts in South Africa, one of which was identified as part of the Botryosphaeria dothidea-complex. In this study, the identity of the other fungus was determined by comparing morphology, pathogenicity and DNA sequence analysis of isolates of both taxa. Based on these results, a new species, Botryosphaeria eucalyptorum, and its anamorph Fusicoccum eucalyptorum, are described. Although the teleomorph is morphologically similar to other taxa in the B. dothidea-complex, conidial characteristics of the anamorph are distinct, as well as the sequences of the nrDNA internal transcribed spacers ITS1 and ITS2. Like B. dothidea, the fungus is pathogenic to Eucalyptus, although there do not appear to be clear differences in pathogenicity between these two species.
S494	L. Swart;R. W. Crous;J. C. Kang;G. R. A. Mchau;I. Pascoe;M. E. Palm	2001	Differentiation of Elsinoë associated with scab disease of Proteaceae based on morphology, symptomatology and ITS DNA sequence analysis	Mycologia	93	2	366-379		http://www.jstor.org/stable/3761658	plant pathogens; Sphaceloma; systematics	Scab disease of Proteaceae, which was initially observed on Leucospermum in South Africa in 1981, has subsequently been reported on this host from Australia and Hawaii. The disease, commonly known as corky bark or scab, is associated with severe losses of commercial plantings of Leucospermum in South Africa, and has also been collected from species of Leucadendron, Protea and Serruria in South Africa, from Banksia, Leucadendron, Mimetes, Protea and Serruria in Australia, and from Leucospermum and Protea in California and Zimbabwe. The causal agent was determined to be a species of Elsinoë, which has not been formally described. The aim of the present study was to elucidate the taxonomy of the species of Elsinoë associated with scab disease of Proteaceae in these countries. Morphology, symptomatology and DNA sequence analysis of the 5.8S rDNA gene and its flanking ITS1 and ITS2 regions were used. Anamorph and teleomorph characteristics of isolates from Leucospermum, Protea and Banksia suggest that there are at least four distinct species involved. These findings are strongly supported by the phylogenetic tree inferred from DNA sequence data. Furthermore, these results also show that the Elsinoë isolates from Leucadendron, Leucospermum and Serruria in South Africa and Australia, and the isolates from Leucospermum in California and Zimbabwe are representative of the same species.
S496	P. W. Tooley;E. D. Goley;M. M. Carras;R. D. Frederick;E. L. Weber;G. A. Kuldau	2001	Characterization of Claviceps species pathogenic on sorghum by sequence analysis of the β-tubulin gene intron 3 region and EF-1α gene intron 4	Mycologia	93	3	541-551		http://www.jstor.org/stable/3761739	detection; ergot; PCR; phylogenetics; sugary disease; taxonomy 	The intron 3 region of the β-tubulin gene, and intron 4 of the translation elongation factor gene were PCR-amplified, cloned, and sequenced to determine relationships among Claviceps species and characterize isolates of Claviceps causing ergot of sorghum in the USA and other countries. The β-tubulin gene intron 3 region and intron 4 of the EF-1α gene allowed clear differentiation of five species (C. africana, C. sorghicola, C. purpurea, C. fusiformis, and C. paspali), two of which (C. africana and C. sorghicola) are pathogens of sorghum, with almost no intraspecific variation observed among isolates. Claviceps isolates obtained from sorghum in the USA contained β-tubulin gene intron 3 region sequences identical to those of C. africana isolates from India, Australia, and South Africa. PCR primers were designed from unique sequences within the β-tubulin intron 3 region that can differentiate the five Claviceps species used in this study. We describe primers that allow direct PCR detection of C. africana from honeydew produced on infected sorghum plants, providing a useful tool for analysis of field samples. The β-tubulin gene intron 3 region and EF-1α intron 4 should prove useful in phylogenetic and epidemiological studies of additional Claviceps species.
S629	D. E. Tuthill;J. C. Frisvad	2001	Eupenicillium bovifimosum, a new species from dry cow manure in Wyoming	Mycologia	94	2	240-246		http://www.mycologia.org/cgi/content/abstract/94/2/240	dung fungi; ITS; LSU DNA; Penicillium; phylogeny; secondary metabolites; systematics; Trichocomaceae	A new species, Eupenicillium bovifimosum, was isolated from dry cow manure collected in Wyoming, USA. The outstanding morphological characteristics of this species are its robust, dense penicilli bearing long, broad columns of conidia, and its smooth-walled, unflanged ascospores which are produced within 3 wk of inoculation onto MEA. The new species produces penicillic acid, a fumagillin-like molecule, patulodin-like compounds CK2108A and CK2108B, and a compound resembling 2-[(2-hydroxypropionyl)amino]benzamide. Phylogenetic analysis using 1100 bases of the ITS and LSU DNA regions indicates that E. bovifimosum is most closely related to E. baarnense, and also to E. crustaceum, E. egyptiacum, and E. tularense.
S523	D. E. Tuthill;J. C. Frisvad;M. Christensen	2001	Systematics of Penicillium simplicissimum based on rDNA sequences, morphology and secondary metabolites	Mycologia	93	2	298-308		http://www.jstor.org/stable/3761651	chemotaxonomy; group-I introns; Penicillium brasilianum; Penicillium piscarium; Penicillium pulvillorum	Penicillium simplicissimum is a broadly circumscribed taxon often encountered on soil community lists and in biotechnological reports. Phylogenetic analysis of the ITS1-5.8S-ITS2 rDNA region indicated that P. simplicissimum s.l. includes several species. Recognition of these species is further supported by differences in micromorphological characters, particularly of the conidia and phialides, and the production of distinct profiles of secondary metabolites by each species. Group-I introns, located in the SSU rDNA, were identified in six of the 21 isolates; their presence was used to test hypotheses about the monophyly of the P. pulvillorum and other intron-bearing strains. Our results show that P. brasilianum, P. ochrochloron, P. piscarium, P. pulvillorum and P. simplicissimum should be recognized as distinct and valid species. Three additional, undescribed species were identified within the P. simplicissimum group, here referred to as Penicillium spp. I, II and III. The name P. simplicissimum should be used only for isolates which closely match the neotype and NRRL 902 in all characters.
S626	S. H. Wu;D. S. Hibbett;M. Binder	2001	Phylogenetic analyses of Aleurodiscus s.l. and allied genera	Mycologia	93	4	720-731		http://www.jstor.org/stable/3761826	Basidiomycota; corticioid fungi; molecular systematics; russuloid clade	The limits and possible subdivision of Aleurodiscus s.l. into Acanthobasidium, Acanthofungus, Acanthophysellum, Aleurobotrys, Aleurocystidiellum, Aleurodiscus s.s., and Gloeosoma were evaluated. Molecular characters were obtained from an approximately 980 base pair fragment at the 5′ end of the nuclear large subunit ribosomal DNA, in 33 strains representing 23 species of Aleurodiscus s.l., Stereum, Xylobolus, and Megalocystidium leucoxanthum. Published sequences of 20 additional species of the russuloid clade were also included. Phylogenetic analyses suggest that Aleurodiscus s.l., Megalocystidium leucoxanthum, Stereum and Xylobolus form a monophyletic group, which may be classified as the family Stereaceae. Corticium roseum, which is the type species of the Corticiaceae, is not in this group, thus Stereaceae is not synonymous with Corticiaceae. Aleurocystidiellum is supported as a monophyletic group. Acanthobasidium, which is characterized by pleurobasidia, is also monophyletic. Aleurodiscus s.s. is supported as monophyletic, but Gloeosoma is not, and the two are not congeneric. The importance of amyloid acanthophyses for recognizing Aleurobotrys is suspect, and its generic status should be further studied. Most of the smooth-spored species form a monophyletic group. Phylogenetic analyses suggest that there has been homoplasy in most of the characters that have been used to subdivide Aleurodiscus s.l., including spore ornamentation, hymenial color, hyphal septation, clamp connections, acanthophyses, and phenoloxidase reactions.
S665	N. Zhang;M. Blackwell	2001	Molecular phylogeny of dogwood anthracnose fungus (Discula destructiva) and the Diaporthales	Mycologia	93	2	355-365		http://www.jstor.org/stable/3761657	evolution; Gaeumannomyces; LSU nrDNA; Magnaporthaceae; Magnaporthe; plant pathogen; RPB2; secondary metabolites; SSU nrDNA	Dogwood anthracnose, caused by Discula destructiva Redlin (1991), is a disease of several native dogwood species in North America. A teleomorph has not been found since the first reports of this disease in the 1970s, although the conidial state suggested a relationship to diaporthalean species. Phylogenetic analyses based on nuclear small subunit rDNA sequences of 47 perithecial ascomycetes placed D. destructiva into the Diaporthales with high bootstrap support. A phylogeny of 20 diaporthalean species based on large subunit rDNA inferred three major clades in the Diaporthales. Discula destructiva and four other Discula species formed a clade with Plagiostoma euphorbiae, Gnomonia padicola, G. setacea, Pleuroceras pleurostylum, Linospora capreae, Amphiporthe castanea, Apioplagiostoma aceriferum, Melanconis marginalis, and Apiosporopsis carpinea. Its sister group included Cryphonectria parasitica, Cryptodiaporthe corni, Endothia eugeniae, Valsa ambiens subspecies leucostomoides, and Apiognomonia supraseptata. Diaporthe phaseolorum formed a distinct basal branch. A primer pair (RPB2-P2F and RPB2-P3R) was developed to amplify a part of the gene encoding the second largest subunit of RNA polymerase II (RPB2) based on published pyrenomycete sequences. The RPB2 phylogeny supported the close relationship of D. destructiva and the diaporthalean species. Characters of pigmentation and anamorph agree with the phylogeny to some extent and emphasize the importance of anamorphs and pigmentation in the taxonomy of the Diaporthales. Family concepts based on perithecium position, ascus persistence, and ascospore morphology were rejected, and a new phylogenetic classification is needed.
S612	K. Hansen;T. Læssøe;D. H. Pfister	2001	Phylogenetics of the Pezizaceae, with an emphasis on Peziza	Mycologia	93	5	958-990	10.2307/3761760			Phylogenetic relationships among members of the Pezizaceae were studied using 90 partial LSU rDNA sequences from 51 species of Peziza and 20 species from 8 additional epigeous genera of the Pezizaceae, viz. Boudiera, Iodophanus, Iodowynnea, Kimbropezia, Pachyella, Plicaria, Sarcosphaera and Scabropezia, and 5 hypogeous genera, viz. Amylascus, Cazia, Hydnotryopsis, Ruhlandiella and Tirmania. To test the monophyly of the Pezizaceae and the relationships to the genera Marcelleina and Pfistera (Pyronemataceae), 6 species from the families Ascobolaceae, Morchellaceae and Pyronemataceae were included. Maximum parsimony and maximum likelihood analyses of these sequences suggest that the Pezizaceae is paraphyletic, because the non-amyloid Marcelleina is nested within it. If Marcelleina was transferred to the Pezizaceae, then the family would be monophyletic. Although the Pezizaceae is traditionally characterized by amyloid asci, our results indicate that the amyloidity is a symplesiomorphy, which has been lost in some lineages, e.g. in those including Marcelleina and Cazia. Nodes deep in the tree could not be resolved, but 7 groups of species (I-VII) are generally well supported or present in all trees. Peziza species, which constitute the core of the family, are present in all groups except group III, confirming the non-monophyly of the genus. The analyses suggest that the other included genera of the Pezizaceae are all nested within Peziza, the placement of Iodophanus being unresolved. The morphologically distinct Peziza gerardii, which forms a clade with Marcelleina, appears to be the sister group to the rest of the Pezizaceae. Morphological features were studied and evaluated in the context of the phylogeny. Distinct types of ascus amyloidity were found to support different rDNA lineages, e.g. a distinct amyloid ring zone at the apex is a synapomorphy for group IV, an intense and unrestricted amyloidity over the apex is mostly found in group VI, and asci that are weakly or diffusely amyloid in the entire length are present in group II. Other morphological features, such as spore surface relief, guttulation, excipulum structure and pigments, while not free from homoplasy, do support the groupings. Anamorphs likewise provide clues to higher-order relationships within the Pezizaceae. Several macro- and micromorphological features, however, appear to have evolved several times independently, including ascomatal form and habit (epigeous, semihypogeous or hypogeous), spore discharge mechanisms, and spore shape. Parsimony-based optimization of character states on our phylogenetic trees suggested that transitions to truffle and truffle-like forms evolved at least three times within the Pezizaceae (in group III, V and VI). The 9 hypogeous species included are nested in lineages with epigeous pezizaceous taxa. Species with apothecia of various shapes and with forcible spore discharge are spread among all groups and the apothecium is suggested to be symplesiomorphic in the Pezizaceae. The results indicate that the apothecia forming Pezizaceae have given rise to at least 3 different forms of hypogeous ascomata without forcible spore discharge: ptychothecia, stereothecia and exothecia.
S791	M. C. Aime;T. J. Baroni;O. K. Miller Jr	2002	Crepidotus thermophilus comb. nov., a reassessment of Melanomphalia thermophila, a rarely collected tropical agaric	Mycologia	94	6	1059-1065		http://www.mycologia.org/cgi/content/abstract/94/6/1059	Crepidotaceae; nuclear large subunit rDNA sequences; Tubaria; type studies	Melanomphalia thermophila (Sing.) Sing. is a rarely collected agaric previously known only from Florida and Brazil. This taxon was originally described as a species of Tubaria and much of Singer's rationale for placing Tubaria within the Crepidotaceae (Imai) Sing. was based on anatomical similarities between T. thermophila and Crepidotus (Fr.) Staude. In later works, T. thermophila was transferred to Melanomphalia M.P. Christ., again forming the basis upon which Singer placed Melanomphalia within the Crepidotaceae. Based on examination of newly collected specimens from Puerto Rico and Panama, type studies, and nuclear large subunit rDNA analysis, we conclude that this taxon is, in fact, a centrally stipitate Crepidotus. Melanomphalia thermophila is transferred to Crepidotus, fully described and illustrated.
S639	M. Binder;A. Bresinsky	2002	Derivation of a polymorphic lineage of Gasteromycetes from boletoid ancestors	Mycologia	94	1	85-98		http://www.mycologia.org/cgi/content/abstract/94/1/85	Astraeus; Boletinellus; Calostoma; Gyroporus; Pisolithus; Phlebopus Scleroderma; nuc-lsu rDNA; taxonomy	The phylogeny of selected gasteromycetes and hymenomycetes was inferred from partial nuclear large subunit rDNA (nuc-lsu, 28S) sequences, delimited by primers LR0R and LR5. Taxon sampling with emphasis on relationships within the Boletales further included some gasteroid groups, which obviously have evolved convergent fruiting body morphology, and therefore remained controversial in taxonomy. This study confirms the close relationship of Geastrales, Gauteriales and Phallales and the presumable derivation of Nidulariales and Tulostomatales within the euagarics clade, as widely accepted. In addition, four Hymenogaster species investigated were found to be in the euagarics clade and a relationship to the Cortinariaceae was indicated. The gasteroid fungus Zelleromyces stephensii is an example for maintaining morphological linkage by a lactiferous hyphal system to the genus Lactarius in the Russulales, and this relationship was affirmed in the sequence analysis. Several previously suggested relationships of gasteromycetes and Boletales were reproducible by analyzing nuc-lsu sequences. As a new result, Astraeus hygrometricus, the barometer earth star, is an additional representative of the Boletales. Together with Boletinellus, Phlebopus, Pisolithus, Calostoma, Gyroporus, Scleroderma, and Veligaster, Astraeus forms an unusual group comprising pileate-stipitate hymenomycetes and polymorphic gasteromycetes. This group is a major lineage within the Boletales and we propose the new suborder Sclerodermatineae, including the six families Boletinellaceae fam. nov. (Boletinellus and Phlebopus), Gyroporaceae (Singer) fam. nov. (Gyroporus), Pisolithaceae (Pisolithus), Astraeaceae (Astraeus), Calostomataceae (Calostoma), and the typus subordinis Sclerodermataceae (Scleroderma and Veligaster). Morphological and ecological characters, and pigment synthesis support the delimitation of the Sclerodermatineae, and indicate the radiation of different lineages in the Boletales originating from fungi with primitive tubular hymenophores. We regard such boletes with gyroid-boletinoid hymenophores, like Boletinellus, Gyrodon, Gyroporus, Paragyrodon and Phlebopus as key taxa in the evolution of Paxillineae, Sclerodermatineae and Boletineae.
S687	M. P. S. Câmara;N. R. O'Neill;P. van Berkum	2002	Phylogeny of Stemphylium spp. based on ITS and glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase gene sequences	Mycologia	94	4	660-672		http://www.mycologia.org/cgi/content/abstract/94/4/660	Pleospora; systematics	The phylogenetic relationships among 44 isolates representing 16 species of Stemphylium were inferred from ITS and glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (gpd) sequence data. The results generally agree with morphological species concepts. There was strong support for monophyly of the genus Stemphylium. Analysis of the gpd fragment in particular was useful for establishing well-supported relationships among the species and isolates of Stemphylium. Species of Stemphylium that appear to have lost the ability to produce a sexual state are scattered among the species with the ability to reproduce sexually (Pleospora spp.). Species that are pathogenic to alfalfa are resolved into two groups. Stemphylium botryosum and two isolates with morphological characters similar to S. globuliferum had identical sequences at both loci. These two loci in S. vesicarium, S. alfalfae and S. herbarum are nearly identical but differ from S. botryosum. The separation of S. vesicarium, S. herbarum and S. alfalfae into separate species by morphometric evidence was not supported by the molecular data. Morphological and developmental characters such as size and shape of conidia, conidiophores, and ascospores, and size and time of maturation of pseudothecia are useful for diagnosing species. However, other morphological characters such as septum development and small variations in conidial wall ornamentation are not as useful.
S815	L. A. Castlebury;A. Y. Rossman;W. Jaklitsch;L. N. Vasilyeva	2002	A preliminary overview of the Diaporthales based on large subunit nuclear ribosomal DNA	Mycologia	94	6	1017-1031		http://www.mycologia.org/cgi/content/abstract/94/6/1017	canker fungi; Cryphonectria; Diaporthe; Discula; phylogeny; Valsa	The ascomycete order Diaporthales includes a number of plant pathogenic fungi such as Cryphonectria parasitica, the chestnut blight fungus, as well as many asexually reproducing fungi without known sexual states. Relationships among genera in the Diaporthales were evaluated as a basis for the recognition of families and to provide a taxonomic framework for the asexually reproducing diaporthalean fungi. Phylogenetic relationships were determined based on analyses of large subunit (LSU) nuclear ribosomal DNA (nrDNA) sequences. Within the Diaporthales 82 sequences representing 69 taxa were analyzed. Results suggest the presence of at least six major lineages within the Diaporthales recognized as the Gnomoniaceae sensu stricto, Melanconidaceae sensu stricto, Schizoparme complex including the anamorph genera Coniella and Pilidiella, Cryphonectria-Endothia complex, Valsaceae sensu stricto, and Diaporthaceae sensu stricto. In addition, six teleomorphic and anamorphic taxa fell within the Diaporthales but were not allied with any of the six lineages.
S680	M. P. S. Câmara;M. E. Palm;P. van Berkum;N. R. O'Neill	2002	Molecular phylogeny of Leptosphaeria and Phaeosphaeria	Mycologia	94	4	630-640		http://www.mycologia.org/cgi/content/abstract/94/4/630	ITS sequence; Phaeoseptoria; Phoma; Plenodomus; Septoria; Stagonospora; systematics	The objectives of this study were to determine the phylogenetic relationships of species of Leptosphaeria and Phaeosphaeria and evaluate the phylogenetic significance of morphological characters of the teleomorph, anamorph, and host. Sequences of the entire ITS region, including the 5.8S rDNA, of 59 isolates representing 54 species were analyzed and the phylogeny inferred using parsimony and distance analyses. Isolates grouped into three well-supported clades. The results of this study support the separation of Phaeosphaeria from Leptosphaeria sensu stricto. Leptosphaeria bicolor and the morphologically similar Leptosphaeria taiwanensis formed a separate, well-supported clade. We conclude that peridial wall morphology, anamorph characteristics, and to a lesser extent host, are phylogenetically significant at the generic level. Ascospore and conidial morphology are taxonomically useful at the species level.
S691	B. C. Couch;L. M. Kohn	2002	A multilocus gene genealogy concordant with host preference indicates segregation of a new species, Magnaporthe oryzae, from M. grisea	Mycologia	94	4	683-693		http://www.mycologia.org/cgi/content/abstract/94/4/683	gray leaf spot; Pyricularia grisea; Pyricularia oryzae; rice blast	Magnaporthe oryzae is described as a new species distinct from M. grisea. Gene trees were inferred for Magnaporthe species using portions of three genes: actin, beta-tubulin, and calmodulin. These gene trees were found to be concordant and distinguished two distinct clades within M. grisea. One clade is associated with the grass genus Digitaria and is therefore nomenclaturally tied to M. grisea. The other clade is associated with Oryza sativa and other cultivated grasses and is described as a new species, M. oryzae. While no morphological characters as yet distinguish them, M. oryzae is distinguished from M. grisea by several base substitutions in each of three loci as well as results from laboratory matings; M.oryzae and M. grisea are not interfertile. Given that M. oryzae is the scientifically correct name for isolates associated with rice blast and grey leaf spot, continued use of M. grisea for such isolates would require formal nomenclatural conservation.
S724	M. Cruse;R. Telerant;T. Gallagher;T. Lee;J. Taylor	2002	Cryptic Species in Stachybotrys chartarum	Mycologia	94	5	814-822		http://www.mycologia.org/cgi/content/abstract/94/5/814	fungal species; molecular evolution; phylogenetic species; population genetics; sick-building syndrome	Stachybotrys chartarum has received much attention as a possible cause of sick-building syndrome. Because morphological species recognition in fungi can hide diversity, we applied a phylogenetic approach to search for cryptic species. We examined 23 isolates from the San Francisco Bay Area, and another seven from around the US. Using markers we developed for three polymorphic protein coding loci (chitin synthase 1, beta-tubulin 2, and trichodiene synthase 5), we infer that two distinct phylogenetic species exist within the single described morphological species. We have found no correlation between genetic isolation and geographic distance.
S741	S. L. Dodd;E. Lieckfeldt;G. J. Samuels	2002	Hypocrea atroviridis sp. nov., the teleomorph of Trichoderma atroviride	Mycologia	95	1	27-40		http://www.mycologia.org/cgi/content/abstract/95/1/27	biological control; Hypocreales; ITS rDNA; systematics; translation-elongation factor EF-1α	A new species, Hypocrea atroviridis, is described for the teleomorph of Trichoderma atroviride. Based on sequences of ITS-1, 5.8S, and ITS-2 regions of the rDNA complex and translation-elongation factor (EF-1α), T. atroviride and H. atroviridis form a well-supported clade within Trichoderma sect. Trichoderma. The conserved anamorphic phenotype of T. atroviride, observed for both conidial and ascospore derived cultures, was only found within that clade. In contrast, the teleomorph phenotype of H. atroviridis was morphologically indistinguishable from H. rufa, the teleomorph of T. viride. This Hypocrea phenotype may, therefore, be considered to be plesiomorphic within Trichoderma sect. Trichoderma, suggesting that genes controlling the expression of the teleomorph and anamorph evolve at different rates and that the genes controlling expression of the teleomorph are more conserved than are those controlling the expression of the anamorph.
S673	D. F. Farr;L. A. Castlebury;A. Y. Rossman	2002	Morphological and molecular characterization of Phomopsis vaccinii and additional isolates from blueberry and cranberry in the eastern United States	Mycologia	94	3	494-504		http://www.mycologia.org/cgi/content/abstract/94/3/494	coelomycetes; cultural characteristics; Diaporthe; dieback; Ericaceae; fungi; ITS; pycnidia; Vaccinium corymbosum; Vaccinium macrocarpon	Forty isolates of Phomopsis were obtained from twigs and berries of highbush blueberry, Vaccinium corymbosum, and cranberry, Vaccinium macrocarpon, isolated primarily from plants grown in the eastern United States. They were characterized using conidiomatal morphology, conidial dimensions, colony appearance and growth rate, and sequences of ITS rDNA. Based on morphological and molecular similarities, most isolates grouped together with an authentic culture of Phomopsis vaccinii Shear. This taxon is described and illustrated. However, some Phomopsis isolates from Vaccinium differed in colony and conidiomatal morphology from P. vaccinii and, based on ITS sequences, were related to isolates of Phomopsis from diverse hosts. These isolates were excluded from P. vaccinii.
S692	M. C. Fisher;G. L. Koenig;T. J. White;J. W. Taylor	2002	Molecular and phenotypic description of Coccidioides posadasii sp. nov., previously recognized as the non-California population of Coccidioides immitis	Mycologia	94	1	73-84	http://www.mycologia.org/cgi/content/abstract/94/1/73		allele; Coccidioidomycosis; microsatellite; Onygenales; phylogeny; systematics	Coccidioides posadasii sp. nov., formerly known as non-California (non-CA) Coccidioides immitis, is described. Phylogenetic analyses using single nucleotide polymorphisms, genes, and microsatellites show that C. posadasii represents a divergent, genetically recombining monophyletic clade. Coccidioides posadasii can be distinguished from C. immitis by numerous DNA polymorphisms, and we show how either of two microsatellite loci may be used as diagnostic markers for this species. Growth experiments show that C. posadasii has significantly slower growth rates on high-salt media when compared with C. immitis, suggesting that other phenotypic characters may exist.
S689	L. C. Grubisha;J. M. Trappe;R. Molina;J. W. Spatafora	2002	Biology of the ectomycorrhizal genus Rhizopogon. VI. Re-examination of infrageneric relationships inferred from phylogenetic analyses of ITS sequences	Mycologia	94	4	607-619		http://www.mycologia.org/cgi/content/abstract/94/4/607	Boletales; indels; phylogeny; Rhizopogonaceae; Suillus	Rhizopogon (Basidiomycota, Boletales) is a genus of hypogeous fungi that form ectomycorrhizal associations mostly with members of the Pinaceae. This genus comprises an estimated 100+ species, with the greatest diversity found in coniferous forests of the Pacific northwestern United States. Maximum parsimony analyses of 54 nuclear ribosomal DNA internal transcribed spacer (ITS) sequences including 27 Rhizopogon and 10 Suillus species were conducted to test sectional relationships in Rhizopogon and examine phylogenetic relationships with the closely related epigeous genus, Suillus. Sequences from 10 Rhizopogon type collections were included in these analyses. Rhizopogon and Suillus were both monophyletic. Rhizopogon section Rhizopogon is not monophyletic and comprised two clades, one of which consisted of two well supported lineages characterized by several long insertions. Rhizopogon sections Amylopogon and Villosuli formed well supported groups, but certain species concepts within these sections were unresolved. Four species from section Fulviglebae formed a strongly supported clade within section Villosuli. Subgeneric taxonomic revisions are presented.
S727	P. Inderbitzin;J. Kohlmeyer;B. Vokmann-Kohlmeyer;M. L. Berbee	2002	Decorospora, a new genus for the marine ascomycete Pleospora gaudefroyi	Mycologia	94	4	651-659		http://www.mycologia.org/cgi/content/abstract/94/4/651	Dothideomycetes; Loculoascomycetes; marine mycology; Pleosporaceae; Pleosporales; Shimodaira-Hasegawa Tests	In this paper, we investigate the phylogenetic placement of Pleospora gaudefroyi using partial SSU as well as ITS ribosomal DNA sequences. Both SSU and ITS data sets agreed in the placement of P. gaudefroyi. Parsimony and neighbor-joining analyses of each data set placed P. gaudefroyi within the Pleosporaceae with 100% bootstrap support. Pleospora gaudefroyi was sister taxon in the Pleosporaceae represented by Alternaria alternata, Cochliobolus sativus, Pleospora herbarum, Pyrenophora tritici-repentis and Setosphaeria rostrata. Pleospora gaudefroyi was separated from other genera in the Pleosporaceae in 94% of the bootstrap replicates in parsimony and neighbor-joining analyses. When P. gaudefroyi was constrained to monophyly with P. herbarum, all resulting trees were significantly worse than the optimal tree in both Kishino-Hasegawa and Shimodaira-Hasegawa tests. Pleospora gaudefroyi was therefore excluded from Pleospora, and transferred to the new genus Decorospora placed in the Pleosporaceae. Decorospora (Dothideomycetes) has characteristic ascospores enclosed in a sheath with 4-5 apical extensions. The distribution and substrate types for D. gaudefroyi are summarized and updated based on additional collections.
S661	E. B. Lickey;K. W. Hughes;R. H. Petersen	2002	Biogeographical patterns in Artomyces pyxidatus	Mycologia	94	3	461-471		http://www.mycologia.org/cgi/content/abstract/94/3/461	Artomyces pyxidatus; biogeography; Clavicorona pyxidata; RFLP; ribosomal DNA	Artomyces pyxidatus (Auriscalpiaceae) is a lignicolous, coralloid basidiomycete found throughout temperate regions of the Northern Hemisphere. Previous studies established that populations from the eastern United States, Sweden, and China were conspecific based on mating compatibility and enzyme profiles. In this study, mating compatibility was extended to include collections from Russia, Costa Rica, Mexico, and Utah. The molecular diversity of A. pyxidatus was examined by DNA sequence and restriction site analyses of the nuclear ribosomal internally transcribed spacer region (ITS1-5.8S-ITS2). A phylogenetic analysis of twelve isolates based on ITS sequences revealed a broad geographical pattern in which Eurasian isolates comprise a sister clade to North American isolates. North American isolates appear to be further subdivided into northeastern and southwestern clades. A survey of 255 A. pyxidatus isolates using restriction enzymes revealed variable RFLP patterns that follow similar geographical patterns.
S620	E. C. Y. Liew;A. Aptroot;K. D. Hyde	2002	An evaluation of the monophyly of Massarina based on ribosomal DNA sequences	Mycologia	94	5	803–813		http://www.mycologia.org/cgi/content/abstract/94/5/803	ascomycetes; fungi; Lophiostoma; Lophiostomataceae	The monophyletic status of the genus Massarina was evaluated on the basis of phylogenetic analysis of the partial small subunit gene (SSU), internal transcribed spacers (ITS 1 & 2), and 5.8S gene sequences of the ribosomal DNA. Species of Massarina used in the study clustered into two distinct clades with high bootstrap support in trees generated from maximum parsimony, weighted parsimony, maximum likelihood, and neighbor-joining analyses. The hypothesis that Massarina species belong to a phylogenetically monophyletic group is rejected. Species with narrowly fusiform ascospores form a monophyletic clade with Lophiostoma, a genus highly similar in morphology. The five species currently accepted in Massarina with such spore morphology are here transferred into the genus Lophiostoma. Massarina species with broadly fusiform to ellipsoidal ascospores are retained as Massarina s. str., lectotypified by M. eburnea. Massarina walkeri is presently excluded from both Massarina and Lophiostoma. The transfer of M. papulosa to a new genus Oletheriostrigula is verified.
S790	O. K. Miller;M. C. Aime;F. Camacho;U. Peintner	2002	Two new species of Gomphidius from the Western United States and Eastern Siberia	Mycologia	94	6	1044-1050		http://www.mycologia.org/cgi/content/abstract/94/6/1044	Basidiomycetes; Gomphidiaceae; ITS sequence data; North America; Russia	Study of the genus Gomphidius from recent material from Asia and North America has been carried out using traditional taxonomy combined with molecular systematics. Two new species of Gomphidius (G. borealis and G. pseudoflavipes) are described, one from Eastern Siberia and a second from rarely collected habitats in the Western United States. One taxon has the longest spores reported for the genus and the second species appears to be associated with a Siberian larch.
S696	C. D. Moon;C. O. Miles;U. Järlfors;C. L. Schardl	2002	The evolutionary origins of three new Neotyphodium endophyte species from grasses indigenous to the Southern Hemisphere	Mycologia	94	4	694-711		http://www.mycologia.org/cgi/content/abstract/94/4/694		Members of the genus Neotyphodium are asexual, seedborne, protective fungal endophytes of cool season grasses that have likely evolved either directly from sexual Epichloë; species, or by the interspecific hybridization of distinct lineages of Epichloë; and Neotyphodium. We investigated the evolutionary origins of Neotyphodium endophytes from several grasses that are indigenous to the Southern Hemisphere using a multiple-gene phylogenetic approach. Intron regions of the genes encoding ß-tubulin (tub2), translation elongation factor 1-α (tef1) and actin (act1) were amplified by polymerase chain reaction and sequenced. Phylogenetic analyses of these sequences, aligned with homologous sequences from Epichloë; spp., revealed the evolutionary origins of the Southern Hemisphere endophytes, where one lineage of apparently non-hybrid origin, and three lineages of unique interspecific hybrid origin were identified. On the basis of morphology, host range and evolutionary history, we propose three new species of Neotyphodium. Neotyphodium aotearoae was isolated from Echinopogon ovatus populations from New Zealand and Australia, and comprised a unique, apparently non-hybrid lineage within the Epichloë; species phylogeny. In contrast, an interspecific hybrid lineage was identified from two Australian Ec. ovatus populations, whose ancestry apparently involved lineages closely related to extant E. festucae and an E. typhina genotype similar to that of isolates from Poa pratensis. Endophytes infecting South African Melica racemosa and M. decumbens (dronkgras) appeared to be hybrids of E. festucae and N. aotearoae or close relatives. The names N. australiense and N. melicicola are proposed for these two hybrid lineages, respectively. The origin of N. tembladerae, an established endophyte species from South American Poa and Festuca spp., was also investigated. Neotyphodium tembladerae appeared to be of hybrid origin, involving E. festucae and an E. typhina genotype similar to that of isolates from Poa nemoralis. The results of this study highlight the widespread occurrence of interspecific hybrid Neotyphodium lineages on a global scale, and the extent of endophyte gene-flow between the Northern and Southern Hemispheres.
S668	M. Mucciarelli;S. Scanerini;C. M. Bertea;M. Maffei	2002	An ascomycetous endophyte isolated from Mentha piperita L.: biological features and molecular studies	Mycologia	94	1	28-39		http://www.mycologia.org/cgi/content/abstract/94/1/28	Ascomycetes; Dicotiledones; epibiotic; essential oils; Lamiaceae; micropropagation; molecular systematics; plant growth; small subunit ribosomal DNA	A hyaline sterile fungus forming epiphyllous mycelial nets was isolated from meristem cultures of Mentha piperita. Histological studies indicated that the culture isolate is able to colonize stems and leaves with no damage to the host plant. In vitro-grown peppermint plants displayed enhanced vegetative growth when infected by the fungus, with mycelium extending from green tissues to growing rootlets. The production of very thin hyphae growing away from host meristems and the asymptomatic nature of the symbiosis were commonly observed in cultures, where the isolate never sporulated. No attribution to a precise morphospecies was therefore possible and the fungal culture was named sterile mycelium PGP-HSF. Through comparison of the 18 S rDNA sequence of the epibiont to those available in literature and in GenBank we were able to determine that the mutualist of peppermint is a member of the Pyrenomycetes, belonging to the subclass Sordariomycetidae.
S1156	U. Peintner;E. Horak;M. M. Moser;R. Vilgalys	2002	Phylogeny of Rozites, Cuphocybe and Rapacea Inferred from ITS and LSU rDNA Sequences	Mycologia	94	4	620-629		http://www.mycologia.org/cgi/content/abstract/94/4/620	Agaricales; amyloid reaction; Cortinarius; Dermocybe; Protoglossum	Phylogenetic relationships of Rozites, Cuphocybe, and Rapacea were assessed using molecular phylogenetic approaches. These three genera are placed in Cortinariaceae and have been regarded as closely related to Cortinarius. Rozites includes more than 20 species, which are characterized by having both a membranaceous partial veil in the form of a persistent annulus and a membranaceous universal veil. Cuphocye (4 species) lacks an annulus or cortina, but has pigmented veil fibrils or scales. The monotypic genus Rapacea accommodates a distinct taxon with pale, nearly smooth and thick-walled basidiospores. We analyzed 56 sequences of the internal transcribed spacer region (ITS1, ITS2, and the intervening 5.8S rRNA gene) for nine species of Rozites, three species of Cuphocybe, 28 species of Cortinarius, Rapacea mariae and Protoglossum luteum. Two species of Hebeloma were used as outgroup. Large subunit (LSU) rDNA sequences from selected taxa were also analyzed. The results clearly demonstrate that Rozites species are nested within the clade/Cortinarius, and that Rozites is polyphyletic, suggesting that membranaceous veils have evolved several times in the genus Cortinarius. Also Rapacea and Cuphocybe are nested within Cortinarius, making the latter genus paraphyletic. Based on phylogenetic studies, Rozites, Cuphocybe and Rapacea are artificial genera and do not reflect natural relationships.
S766	A. Riethmüeller;H. Voglmayr;M. Göker;M. Weiß;F. Oberwinkler	2002	Phylogenetic relationships of the downy mildews (Peronosporales) and related groups based on nuclear large subunit ribosomal DNA sequences	Mycologia	94	5	834-849		http://www.mycologia.org/cgi/content/abstract/94/5/834	LSU rDNA; molecular evolution; Oomycota; Peronosporomycetidae; plant pathogen	In order to investigate phylogenetic relationships of the Peronosporomycetes (Oomycetes), nuclear large subunit ribosomal DNA sequences containing the D1 and D2 region were analysed of 92 species belonging to the orders Peronosporales, Pythiales, Leptomitales, Rhipidiales, Saprolegniales and Sclerosporales. The data were analysed applying methods of neighbor-joining as well as maximum parsimony, both statistically supported using the bootstrap method. The results confirm the major division between the Pythiales and Peronosporales on the one hand and the Saprolegniales, Leptomitales and Rhipidiales on the other. The Sclerosporales were shown to be polyphyletic; while Sclerosporaceae are nested within the Peronosporaceae, the Verrucalvaceae are merged within the Saprolegniales. Within the Peronosporomycetidae, Pythiales as well as Peronosporales as currently defined are polyphyletic. Albugo is the most basal, well-supported lineage, followed by a Pythium-Lagenidium clade. The third, highly supported clade comprises the Peronosporaceae together with Sclerospora, Phytophthora and Peronophythora. Peronophythora is placed within Phytophthora, indicating that both genera should be merged. Bremiella is clearly nested within the genus Plasmopara and polyphyletic, suggesting a transfer to Plasmopara. The species of Peronospora do not appear as a monophyletic group. Peronospora species growing on Brassicaceae form a highly supported clade.
S767	J. P. Sampaio;M. Weiß;M. Gadanho;R. Bauer	2002	New taxa in the Tremellales: Bulleribasidium oberjochense gen. et sp. nov., Papiliotrema bandonii gen. et sp. nov. and Fibulobasidium murrhardtense sp. nov	Mycologia	94	5	873-887		http://www.mycologia.org/cgi/content/abstract/94/5/873	dimorphic heterobasidiomycetes; molecular phylogeny; systematics; 26S rDNA; Tremellales; ultrastructure	Two new genera, Bulleribasidium and Papiliotrema, and three new species, B. oberjochense, P. bandonii and Fibulobasidium murrhardtense are described. An integrated analysis of morphological, ultrastructural, physiological, and molecular data indicates that the new taxa belong to the Tremellales (Basidiomycota). Relevant characteristics of the new genera and species are discussed and compared with those of closely related taxa.
S634	G. J. Samuels;S. L. Dodd;W. Gams;L. Castlebury;O. Petrini	2002	Trichoderma species associated with the green mold epidemic of commercially grown Agaricus bisporus	Mycologia	94	1	146-170		http://www.mycologia.org/cgi/content/abstract/94/1/146	green mold disease; Hypocrea; Hypocreales; ITS; systematics; translation elongation factor 1 alpha gene (EF-1α); Trichoderma aggressivum; Trichoderma atroviride; Trichoderma harzianum	Trichoderma aggressivum sp. nov. and T. aggressivum f. europaeum f. nov. are described. These forms cause the green mold epidemic in commercially grown Agaricus bisporus in North America and Europe, respectively. In the literature they have been reported as T. harzianum biotypes Th 4 and Th 2, respectively. They are strongly separated from their closest relative, T. harzianum, in sequences of the ITS-1 region of nuclear rDNA and an approximately 689 bp fragment of the protein coding translation elongation factor gene (EF-1α). They are distinguished from the morphologically similar T. harzianum and T. atroviride (the latter also known as biotype Th 3) most readily by rate of growth. Of these, only T. harzianum grows well and sporulates at 35 C, while T. atroviride is the slowest growing. Trichoderma aggressivum f. aggressivum and f. europaeum are effectively indistinguishable morphologically although they have subtly different growth rates at 25 C on SNA and statistically significant micromorphological differences. Based on findings of this study, descriptions of T. harzianum and T. atroviride are expanded. A key to Trichoderma species commonly found associated with commercially grown A. bisporus is provided.
S651	Q. Shen;D. M. Geiser;D. J. Royse	2002	Molecular phylogenetic analysis of Grifola frondosa (maitake) reveals a species partition separating North American and Asian isolates	Mycologia	94	3	472-482		http://www.mycologia.org/cgi/content/abstract/94/3/472	ß-tubulin; biogeography; genetics; ITS; mushroom cultivation; nucleotide variation	A phylogenetic analysis was performed on 51 isolates of the commercially valuable basidiomycete, Grifola frondosa (maitake), using sequences from the Internal Transcribed Spacers and 5.8S region of the nuclear ribosomal DNA (rDNA) and a portion of the ß-tubulin gene. The ß-tubulin gene provided more than twice as many variable characters as the ITS/5.8S regions. The isolates analyzed comprised 21 from eastern North America, 27 from Asia, one from Europe, and two of unknown geographic origin, one of which was the major US commercial production strain in use. Grifola sordulenta was used as an outgroup. Combined and separate analysis of both genes showed a partition separating Asian versus eastern North American isolates. Bootstrap analysis showed strong support for these clades in the ß-tubulin data alone and in the combined data. The major commercial isolate of unknown geographic origin is apparently of Asian descent based on its grouping within the Asian clade. The single European isolate analyzed was distinct from both the eastern North American and Asian clades. These results indicate strong support for a species partition separating eastern North American and Asian isolates of G. frondosa, despite previous studies indicating no morphological distinction between them.
S789	E. T. Steenkamp;B. D. Wingfield;A. E. Desjardins;W. F. O. Marasas;M. J. Wingfield	2002	Cryptic speciation in Fusarium subglutinans	Mycologia	94	6	1032-1043		http://www.mycologia.org/cgi/content/abstract/94/6/1032	Fusarium subglutinans; maize; reproductive isolation; teosinte	Fusarium isolates that form part of the Gibberella fujikuroi species complex have been classified using either a morphological, biological, or phylogenetic species concept. Problems with the taxonomy of Fusarium species in this complex are mostly experienced when the morphological and biological species concepts are applied. The most consistent identifications are obtained with the phylogenetic species concept. Results from recent studies have presented an example of discordance between the biological and phylogenetic species concepts, where a group of F. subglutinans sensu stricto isolates, i.e., isolates belonging to mating population E of the G. fujikuroi complex, could be sub-divided into more than one phylogenetic lineage. The aim of this study was to determine whether this sub-division represented species divergence or intraspecific diversity in F. subglutinans. For this purpose, we included 29 F. subglutinans isolates belonging to the E-mating population that were collected from either maize or teosinte, from a wide geographic range. DNA sequence data for six nuclear regions in each of these isolates were obtained and used in phylogenetic concordance analyses. These analyses revealed the presence of two major groups representing cryptic species in F. subglutinans. These cryptic species were further sub-divided into a number of smaller groups that appear to be reproductively isolated in nature. This suggests not only that the existing F. subglutinans populations are in the process of divergence, but also that each of the resulting lineages are undergoing separation into distinct taxa. These divergences did not appear to be linked to geographic origin, host, or phenotypic characters such as morphology.
S702	Z. Wang;M. Binder;D. S. Hibbett	2002	A new species of Cudonia based on mophological and molecular data	Mycologia	94	4	641-650		http://www.mycologia.org/cgi/content/abstract/94/4/641	Chinese fungi; Geoglossaceae; Helotiales; ITS; Leotiaceae; nuc-lsu rDNA; Spathulariopsis	A discomycete collected in western Sichuan, China, is morphologically intermediate between Cudonia and Spathularia. The fungus has a bright yellow capitate ascigerous head, a white, ridged stalk, and a well-developed membrane covering the whole ascoma. The asci, ascospores, and paraphyses are similar to those of Cudonia and Spathularia. Based on morphology and DNA sequence analysis, a new species, Cudonia sichuanensis, is reported. Cudonia and Spathularia are closely related to members of Rhytismataceae, as has been suggested previously. The similarity of ascoma and ascospore development between these two genera and Lophodermium (Rhytismataceae) is discussed.
S683	A. Weir;M. Hughes	2002	The taxonomic status of Corethromyces bicolor from New Zealand, as inferred from morphological, developmental, and molecular studies	Mycologia	94	3	483-493		http://www.mycologia.org/cgi/content/abstract/94/3/483	Corethromyces; Laboulbeniales; Mimeomyces; Sphaleromyces; taxonomy	Due to the absence of antheridial characters in collected material the precise placement of Corethromyces bicolor has remained troublesome up until now. Recent re-examination of receptacular and appendage characters present in the holotype led to its transfer to the genus Mimeomyces. Fresh collections of this fungus have provided the opportunity to re-assess its taxonomic position. Based on a combination of morphological and molecular characters, this species is re-instated within the genus Corethromyces.
S851	T. Aoki;K. O'Donnell;Y. Homma;A. R. Lattanzi	2003	Sudden death syndrome of soybean is caused by two morphologically and phylogenetically distinct species within the Fusarium solani species complex, F. virguliforme in North America and F. tucumaniae in South America	Mycologia	95	4	660-684				Soybean sudden death syndrome has become a serious constraint to commercial production of this crop in North and South America during the past decade. To assess whether the primary etiological agent is panmictic in both hemispheres, morphological and molecular phylogenetic analyses were conducted on strains selected to represent the known pathogenic and genetic diversity of this pathogen. Maximum parsimony analysis of DNA sequences from the nuclear ribosomal intergenic spacer region and the single copy nuclear gene translation elongation factor 1-a, together with detailed morphological comparisons of conidial features, indicate that SDS of soybean in North and South America is caused by two phylogenetically and morphologically distinct species. Fusarium virguliforme sp. nov., formally known as F. solani f. sp. glycines, is described and illustrated for the SDS pathogen in North America, and F. tucumaniae sp. nov. is proposed for the South American pathogen. The molecular phylogenetic results challenge the forma specialis naming system because pathogenicity to soybean may have evolved convergently in F. tucumaniae and F. virguliforme. Phylogenetic evidence indicates the two SDS pathogens do not share a most recent common ancestor since F. tucumaniae was resolved as a sister to a pathogen of Phaseolus vulgaris, F. phaseoli comb. nov. All three pathogens appear to have evolutionary origins in the southern hemisphere since they are deeply nested within a South American clade of the F. solani species complex.
S869	I. Barnes;J. Roux;B. D. Wingfield;M. J. Dudzinski;K. M. Old;M. J. Wingfield	2003	Ceratocystis pirilliformis, a new species from Eucalyptus nitens in Australia	Mycologia							Several species of Ceratocystis have been recorded on Eucalyptus. These include C. fimbriata, C. eucalypti, C. moniliformis, and C. moniliformopsis. Of these, only C. fimbriata is known as a pathogen, where it has recently been found causing serious wilt diseases in Uganda, Congo, and Brazil. This study was undertaken to collect Ceratocystis species, including C. eucalypti, from artificially induced wounds on Eucalyptus nitens near Canberra in southeastern Australia. Trees were wounded in October 2000 and wounds were examined approximately one month later. Ascomata characteristic of a Ceratocystis species, were found covering the wounds and this fungus was also isolated from the wood using carrot baiting. This species of Ceratocystis has hat-shaped ascospores similar to those of C. fimbriata but it differs from C. fimbriata and all other species of Ceratocystis in possessing ascomata with a pyriform base. Comparison of DNA sequences from the ITS and 5.8S rRNA operon confirmed that the fungus from E. nitens in Australia is unique and we describe it here as a new species, C. pirilliformis.
S822	R. Bauer;D. Begerow;F. Oberwinkler;L. Maranovú	2003	Classicula: the teleomorph of Naiadella fluitans	Mycologia							A new genus, Classicula, and a new species, Classicula fluitans, are described in the Urediniomycetes for the teleomorph of Naiadella fluitans. Classicula fluitans forms transversly septate basidia with subapically swollen sterigmata and long-fusiform basidiospores. An integrated analysis of morphological, ultrastructural, and molecular data indicates that Classicula fluitans is a member of the Urediniomycetes. Among the Urediniomycetes, Classicula fluitans shares the formation of simple septal pores associated with microbodies and tremelloid haustorial cells only with the hyphomycet Jaculispora submersa. In addition, in our molecular phylogenetic analyses with at least two representatives of all known Urediniomycetous groups Classicula fluitans appears together with Jaculispora submersa in a statistically well supported cluster. Accordingly, the family Classiculaceae and the order Classiculales are proposed to accommodate these fungi in the Urediniomycetes.
S885	M. Blackwell;D. A. Henk;K. Jones	2003	Extreme morphological divergence: phylogenetic position of a termite ectoparasite	Mycologia	95	6	987-992				Species of Termitaria are lesion-forming ectoparasites occurring worldwide on a diverse group of termites. The reduced thalli consist of a basal cell layer from which haustorial cells penetrate the termite and darkly-pigmented sporodochial conidionemata arise. One species, Termitaria snyderi, has been the subject of several morphological studies, but its phylogenetic position has remained enigmatic. Here we provide evidence of a close relationship between T. snyderi and the morphologically distinct ascomycetes, Kathistes analemmoides and K. calyculata, based on phylogenetic analysis of molecular characters derived from portions of the nuclear-encoded small subunit ribosomal RNA gene (ssu rDNA) and supplemental evidence from the ﬂ-tubulin gene. Trees were derived using parsimony and maximum likelihood criteria, and Bayesian analysis and parsimony bootstrap methods were used to assess support for the tree nodes.
S771	M. P. A. Coetzee;B. D. Wingfield;P. Bloomer;G. S. Ridley;M. J. Wingfield	2003	Molecular identification and phylogeny of Armillaria isolates from South America and Indo-Malaysia	Mycologia	95	2	285-293		http://www.mycologia.org/cgi/content/abstract/95/2/285	Armillaria limonea; Armillaria luteobubalina; Armillaria novae-zelandiae; IGS-1; ITS; phylogeny; systematics	Armillaria root rot is a serious disease, chiefly of woody plants, caused by many species of Armillaria that occur in temperate, tropical and subtropical regions of the world. Very little is known about Armillaria in South America and Southeast Asia, although Armillaria root rot is well known in these areas. In this study, we consider previously unidentified isolates collected from trees with symptoms of Armillaria root rot in Chile, Indonesia and Malaysia. In addition, isolates from basidiocarps resembling A. novae-zelandiae and A. limonea, originating from Chile and Argentina, respectively, were included in this study because their true identity has been uncertain. All isolates in this study were compared, based on their similarity in ITS sequences with previously sequenced Armillaria species, and their phylogenetic relationship with species from the Southern Hemisphere was considered. ITS sequence data for Armillaria also were compared with those available at GenBank. Parsimony and distance analyses were conducted to determine the phylogenetic relationships between the unknown isolates and the species that showed high ITS sequence similarity. In addition, IGS-1 sequence data were obtained for some of the species to validate the trees obtained from the ITS data set. Results of this study showed that the ITS sequences of the isolates obtained from basidiocarps resembling A. novae-zelandiae are most similar to those for this species. ITS sequences for isolates from Indonesia and Malaysia had the highest similarity to A. novae-zelandiae but were phylogenetically separated from this species. Isolates from Chile, for which basidiocarps were not found, were similar in their ITS and IGS-1 sequences to the isolate from Argentina that resembled A. limonea. These isolates, however, had the highest ITS and IGS-1 sequence similarity to authentic isolates of A. luteobubalina and were phylogenetically more closely related to this species than to A. limonea.
S788	Z. W. de Beer;T. C. Harrington;H. F. Vismer;B. D. Wingfield;M. J. Wingfield	2003	Phylogeny of the Ophiostoma stenoceras - Sporothrix schenckii complex	Mycologia	95	3	434-441		http://www.mycologia.org/cgi/content/abstract/95/3/434	abietinum; albidum; ITS; narcissi; nigrocarpum; ponderosae; rDNA	Ophiostoma stenoceras is a well-known sapwood-colonizing fungus occurring on some coniferous and hardwood hosts in the Northern Hemisphere. In the Southern Hemisphere, the fungus has been reported only from New Zealand. The human pathogen, Sporothrix schenckii, has been suggested to be the anamorph of O. stenoceras. The aim of this study was to gain a better understanding of the phylogenetic relationship between these two species. The study also provided the opportunity to confirm the identity of some Sporothrix and O. stenoceras-like isolates recently collected from wood and soil around the world. For this purpose, the DNA sequence of internal transcribed spacer (ITS) regions of the ribosomal RNA operon was determined. Isolates of O. nigrocarpum, O. albidum, O. abietinum, O. narcissi and O. ponderosae, all morphologically similar to O. stenoceras, were included in the study. From phylogenetic analyses of the sequence data, four main clades were observed. These represented O. stenoceras, O. nigrocarpum and two separate groups containing isolates of S. schenckii. Our results confirm earlier suggestions that S. schenckii should be classified within the teleomorph genus Ophiostoma but support studies separating O. stenoceras and S. schenckii. Ophiostoma albidum and O. ponderosae should be considered synonyms of O. stenoceras. The status of O. narcissi and O. abietinum needs further clarification. The two groups within S. schenckii might represent two species, but this needs to be confirmed. This study represents the first reports of O. stenoceras from Colombia, Kenya, Uruguay and South Africa.
S925	H. C. Den Bakker;B. Gravendeel;T. W. Kuyper	2003	An ITS phylogeny of Leccinum and an analysis of the evolution of minisatellite-like sequences within ITS1	Mycologia							Abstract: Phylogenetic relationships of the European species of Leccinum (Boletales, Boletaceae) were investigated by maximum parsimony, Bayesian and likelihood analyses of nrITS1-5.8S-ITS2 and 28S sequences. The separate gene trees inferred were largely concordant, and their combined analysis indicates that several traditional sectional and species-level taxonomic schemes are artificial. In Leccinum, the nrITS region ranges in size from 694 to 1480 bp. This extreme length heterogeneity is localized to a part of the ITS1 spacer that contains a minisatellite characterized by the repeated presence of CTATTGAAAAG and CTAATAGAAAG core sequences and mutational derivatives thereof. The number of core sequences present in the minisatellite varied from 12 to 36. Intra-individual sequence variation of the minisatellite was always smaller than between different species, indicating that concerted evolution proceeds rapidly enough to retain phylogenetic signal at the infraspecific level. In contrast, the evolutionary pattern exhibited by the major ITS1 repeat types found was homoplastic when mapped onto the species lineages inferred from the combined 5.8S-ITS2 sequences. The minisatellite therefore appears not to be useful for phylogeny reconstruction at or above the species level.
S779	S. Denman;P. W. Crous;J. Z. Groenewald;B. Slippers;B. D. Wingfield;M. J. Wingfield	2003	Circumscription of Botryosphaeria species associated with Proteaceae based on morphology and DNA sequence data	Mycologia	95	2	294-307		http://www.mycologia.org/cgi/content/abstract/95/2/294	Botryosphaeria protearum; Fusicoccum protearum; ITS; key; systematics	Botryosphaeria spp. occur on and cause diseases of Proteaceae, but accurate identification has been problematic due to the lack of clear species circumscriptions of members of this genus. In this study, 46 isolates of Botryosphaeria from proteaceous hosts growing in various parts of the world were studied, using morphology, cultural characters and sequence data from the ITS region of the rDNA operon. Five Botryosphaeria spp. were found to be associated with Proteaceae. Botryosphaeria lutea was isolated from Banksia and Buckinghamia spp. in Australia, and a single isolate was obtained from Protea cynaroides in South Africa. Botryosphaeria proteae was associated only with South African Proteaceae, but occurred in many parts of the world. Another Botryosphaeria sp. that occurred exclusively on South African Proteaceae represents a new taxon that is described as B. protearum. This pathogen was found on South African Proteaceae cultivated in Australia; Hawaii; Portugal, including the Madeira Islands; and South Africa. Botryosphaeria ribis was associated with both South African and Australian Proteaceae and was isolated from material collected in Australia, Hawaii and Zimbabwe. A single occurrence of B. obtusa as an endophyte was recorded from P. magnifica in South Africa. In addition to providing a taxonomic overview of Botryosphaeria spp. associated with Proteaceae, this paper clarifies for the first time the global distribution of these species. A key also is provided to facilitate their identification. A large number of new host and distribution records are made and a new species of Botryosphaeria from Proteaceae is described.
S865	O. E. Eriksson;D. L. Hawksworth	2003	Saccharicola, a new genus for two Leptosphaeria species on sugar cane	Mycologia	95	3	426-433		http://www.mycologia.org/cgi/content/abstract/95/3/426	ascomycetes; Leptosphaeria bicolor; Massarinaceae; phylogeny; Pleosporales; SSU rDNA; morphology	Leptosphaeria bicolor, causal agent of a leaf scorch disease of sugar cane, is referred to the new genus Saccharicola. The ascospores are 1–3 transseptate and hyaline at first but become melanized and rough after release, as is the case in some members of Massarina and Lophiostoma. SSU rDNA data indicate that it is closely related to M. eburnea but is biotrophic in leaves of sugar cane and not corticolous, the ascomata are less melanized, and it has Stagonospora- and Phoma-like synanamorphs, not a Ceratophoma-like anamorph. A second species, Leptosphaeria taiwanensis, is transferred to Saccharicola. It differs in slightly larger, normally 1-septate, hyaline spores with more attenuated ends. The family Massarinaceae is resurrected to accommodate Massarina s. str., Keissleriella, Saccharicola and Helminthosporium. These genera formed a clade with 100% bootstrap support in a parsimony analysis of SSU rDNA sequences from 38 ascomycetes, 30 of them members of Pleosporales (including Melanommatales).
S1248	S. Garnica;M. Weiß;B. Oertel;F. Oberwinkler	2003	Phylogenetic relationships of European Phlegmacium species (Cortinarius, Agaricales)	Mycologia	95	6	1155-1170				Phylogenetic relationships of 54 European Phlegmacium species, including members of most of the sections of classical systematics, were studied, integrating macro-, micromorphological and chemical characters of the basidiomes, as well as molecular phylogenetic analysis of nuclear rDNA sequences. Microscopical structures of the basidiomes were studied by light microscopy. Basidiospore morphology was examined by scanning electron microscopy. Internal transcribed spacers (ITS 1 and 2, including the 5.8S) and the D1/D2 (LSU) regions of nuclear rDNA were sequenced and analyzed with a Bayesian Markov chain Monte Carlo approach. Many subgroups detected by the molecular analysis are related to groups known from classical systematical concepts. Among others, these subgroups were significantly supported: i) a group containing most of the members of section Fulvi ss. Brandrud and the species C. arcuatorum, C. dibaphus and C. multiformis, ii) a group comprising taxa of section Calochroi ss. Brandrud and the species C. fulvocitrinus and C. osmophorus, iii) a group containing species of section Glaucopodes ss. Brandrud and C. caerulescens, iv) a group including members of section Phlegmacioides ss. Brandrud, v) a group that includes the species C. cephalixus, C. nanceiensis, and C. mussivus. Stipe shape, color of flesh, pigment contents, KOH reaction on pileipellis and gelatinous layer, degree of development of a gelatinous layer on the pileipellis, and pileipellis structure were useful characters in delimiting subgroups in Phlegmacium, while basidiospore morphology was significant at species level. With the exception of C. glaucopus, C. infractus, and C. scaurus, ITS and D1/D2 sequences obtained from collections of the same species from different geographical origins showed very little variation. Our molecular and morphological analyses suggest revisions of the traditional concepts of the subgenus Phlegmacium in Europe.
S978	A. Greslebin;K. K. Nakasone;M. Rajchenberg	2003	Rhizochaete--a new genus of phanerochaetoid fungi	Mycologia							A new basidiomycete genus, Rhizochaete (Phanerochaetaceae, Polyporales), is described. Rhizochaete is characterized by a smooth to tuberculate, pellicular hymenophore and hyphal cords that turn red or violet in potassium hydroxide, monomitic hyphal system of simple or nodose septate hyphae, cystidia, and small, cylindrical to subglobose basidiospores. Morphologically, it is most similar to Phanerochaete. Analyses of nuclear ribosomal and internal transcribed spacer region sequence data support a close relationship of Rhizochaete to Phanerochaete. The new taxon R. brunnea, from southern Argentina, is described and illustrated. In addition, the new combinations R. americana, R. borneensis, R. filamentosa, R. fouquieriae and R. radicata are proposed. A key to the species of Rhizochaete is provided.
S984	S. Hambleton;A. Tsuneda;R. S. Currah	2003	Comparative morphology and phylogenetic placement of two microsclerotial black fungi from Sphagnum	Mycologia	95		959-975				Capnobotryella renispora and Scleroconidioma sphagnicola form black, irregularly shaped microsclerotia that are indistinguishable in gross morphology on leaves of Sphagnum fuscum. In culture, microsclerotia of these fungi were similar in that mature component cells possessed thick, highly melanized cell walls, poorly defined organelles, large lipid bodies, and simple septa. They were different in morphogenesis, in the way their component cells were organized and in disseminative propagules. Microsclerotia of S. sphagnicola formed phialidic conidiogenous cells on their surface, whereas in C. renispora, adjacent cells in mature microsclerotia often separated from each other by septum schizolysis and formed chlamydospores. The identification of C. renispora from Sphagnum is provisional despite a 100% ITS sequence match with data for a culture derived from the type strain. No holoblastic, reniform conidia typical of the species were formed in nature or in culture and the SSU sequence for a separately preserved culture of the ex-type strain was markedly divergent. Parsimony analyses of nuclear ribosomal DNA sequences showed that these two fungi were related to separate orders of Dothideomycetes. Both SSU and ITS data supported a close relationship for S. sphagnicola to the Dothideales sensu stricto while the closest ITS match was to Rhizosphaera spp. In the SSU analyses, C. renispora was nested within the Capnodiales.
S848	D. A. Henk;A. Weir;M. Blackwell	2003	Laboulbeniopsis termitarius, an ectoparasite of termites newly recognized as a member of the Laboulbeniomycetes	Mycologia							Minute fungi associated with termites have caused taxonomic problems in the past due to their autapomorphic and highly reduced morphologies. DNA sequence data from one such enigmatic fungus, Laboulbeniopsis termitarius, supports its phylogenetic position as member of a Laboulbeniomycete clade within the Ascomycota. This clade is composed entirely of fungi associated with arthropods, often as parasites, and the inclusion of L. termitarius supports the single origin thallus development by means of enlargement and division of the spore.
S947	S. M. Huhndorf;A. N. Miller;F. A. Fernandez	2003	Molecular systematics of the Sordariales: The order and the family Lasiosphaeriaceae redefined	Mycologia	95						The Sordariales is a taxonomically diverse group that has contained from seven to 14 families in recent years. The largest family is the Lasiosphaeriaceae, which has contained between 33 and 53 genera depending on the chosen classification. To determine the affinities and taxonomic placement of the Lasiosphaeriaceae and other families in the Sordariales, taxa representing every family in the Sordariales and most of the genera in the Lasiosphaeriaceae were targeted for phylogenetic analysis using partial sequences of the large subunit (LSU) nrDNA. Based on molecular data, only genera within the families Chaetomiaceae, Lasiosphaeriaceae and Sordariaceae are retained within the redefined Sordariales. The order is a coherent group with morphologies that vary along well-defined lines including large ascomata with large-celled membraneous or coriaceous walls and ascospores that show variation on a distinctive developmental theme, often with appendages or sheaths. The paraphyletic chaetomiaceous complex and the strongly supported Sordariaceae are nested among taxa traditionally placed in the Lasiosphaeriaceae. Analyses also indicate that 11 genera belong in the paraphyletic lasiosphaeriaceous complex. These taxa share a similar developmental pattern in their ascospore morphology that extends to the Sordariales as a whole. Based on these similarities in morphology, 13 additional genera are retained within the lasiosphaeriaceous complex and more than 35 genera have relationships in the order overall. Based on LSU data, 17 genera that have been assigned to the Lasiosphaeriaceae sensu lato are transferred to other families outside the Sordariales and 22 additional genera with differing morphologies subsequently are transferred out of the order. Two new orders, Coniochaetales and Chaetosphaeriales, are recognized for the families Coniochaetaceae and Chaetosphaeriaceae respectively. The Boliniaceae is accepted in the Boliniales and the Nitschkiaceae is accepted in the Coronophorales. Annulatascaceae and Cephalothecaceae are placed in Sordariomycetidae inc. sed., and Batistiaceae is placed in the Euascomycetes inc. sed.
S873	M. A. Klich;J. W. Cary;S. B. Beltz;C. A. Bennett	2003	Phylogenetic and Morphological Analysis of Aspergillus ochraceoroseus	Mycologia							Aspergillus ochraceoroseus produces the yellow-gold conidia and other charactertistics of Aspergillus subgenus Circumdati section Circumdati. However, it produces aflatoxin, a secondary metabolite characteristic of some members of Aspergillus subgenus Circumdati section Flavi and sterigmatocystin, a related secondary metabolite usually associated with Aspergillus subgenus Nidulantes sections Nidulantes and Versicolores, and members of several other genera. Our morphological data supports the placement of A. ochraceoroseus in subgenus Circumdati. Sequence data from A. ochraceoroseus aflatoxin and sterigmatocystin genes aflR and nor-1/stcE, as well as 5.8S ITS and beta tubulin genes was compared to that of aspergilli in sections Circumdati, Flavi, Nidulantes and Versicolores. In the sequence comparisons, A. ochraceoroseus was more closely related to the species in subgenus Nidulantes than to species from subgenus Circumdati.
S787	A. M. Kretzer;D. L. Luoma;R. Molina;J. W. Spatafora	2003	Taxonomy of the Rhizopogon vinicolor species complex based on analysis of ITS sequences and microsatellite loci	Mycologia	95	3	480-487		http://www.mycologia.org/cgi/content/abstract/95/3/480	fungal species concepts; internal transcribed spacers; microsatellite markers; Rhizopogon	We are re-addressing species concepts in the Rhizopogon vinicolor species complex (Boletales, Basidiomycota) using sequence data from the internal-transcribed spacer (ITS) region of the nuclear ribosomal repeat, as well as genotypic data from five microsatellite loci. The R. vinicolor species complex by our definition includes, but is not limited to, collections referred to as R. vinicolor Smith, R. diabolicus Smith, R. ochraceisporus Smith, R. parvulus Smith or R. vesiculosus Smith. Holo- and/or paratype material for the named species is included. Analyses of both ITS sequences and microsatellite loci separate collections of the R. vinicolor species complex into two distinct clades or clusters, suggestive of two biological species that subsequently are referred to as R. vinicolor sensu Kretzer et al and R. vesiculosus sensu Kretzer et al. Choice of the latter names, as well as morphological characters, are discussed.
S917	B. R. Kropp;P. B. Matheny	2003	Basidiospore homoplasy and variation in the Inocybe chelanensis group in North America	Mycologia							A morphological and genetic study of Inocybe chelanensis and other North American species of Inocybe that have unusually elongated nodulose spores is presented. Taxonomy and illustrations of these species are provided along with a key to these and similar species found in Europe and North America. The species concept of I. chelanensis is broadened to include the range of variation occurring for the species in North America. Despite different basidiospore morphologies, I. chelanensis is more closely related to I. stellatospora, and I. candidipes is more closely related to I. glabrodisca based on RPB1 and nLSU-rDNA nucleotide sequences. Distal elongation of Inocybe basidiospores was achieved independently in at least two separate lineages of Inocybe. Inocybe candidipes and I. sierraensis are described as new.
S854	S. Lee;J. Z. Groenewald;J. E. Taylor;F. Roets;P. W. Crous	2003	Rhynchostomatoid fungi occurring on Proteaceae	Mycologia							A new ascomycete fungus with long-necked perithecia having central ostioles and striate ascospores, was isolated from flowerheads of Protea burchellii and P. laurifolia in South Africa, and is described here as Rhynchostoma proteae sp. nov. Sequence data obtained from the small subunit ribosomal DNA (SSU nrDNA) place this fungus with 100% bootstrap support in a clade containing the type species of Rhynchostoma, R. minutum. Another similar fungus with verruculose ascospores was also observed on a member of the Proteaceae from Australia, Lomatia polymorpha, which is described here as Rhynchomeliola lomatiae sp. nov. These two species are illustrated and contrasted to a third species from Proteaceae, Rhynchomeliola australiense, known from Grevillea in Australia.
S902	B. Lu;I. S. Druzhinina;P. Fallah;P. Chaverri;C. Gradinger;C. P. Kubicek;G. J. Samuels	2003	Hypocrea/Trichoderma species with pachybasium-like conidiophores: teleomorphs for T. minutisporum and T. polysporum, and their newly discovered relatives	Mycologia							In the present paper we describe or redescribe species of Hypocrea/Trichoderma (Ascomycetes, Hypocreales) having hyaline ascospores and pachybasium-like conidiophores. Teleomorphs are reported for Trichoderma minutisporum (Hypocrea minutispora sp. nov.) and T. polysporum (H. pachybasioides). Hypocrea pilulifera/T. piluliferum is redescribed. Trichoderma croceum is synonymized with T. polysporum. The new species H. parapilulifera, H. stellata, and H. lacuwombatensis are described. All of these species fall within the morphological concept of Trichoderma sect. Pachybasium and within the phylogenetic group 'pachybasium B5' of Kullnig-Gradinger et al (2002). Parsimony analysis of nucleotide sequences from three unlinked loci ñ ITS1 and 2, endochitinase (ech42) and translation elongation factor 1-alpha (tef1) - detects two distinct phylogenetic lineages within the group "pachybasium B5,' one comprising H. pachybasioides/T. polysporum, H. pilulifera/T. piluliferum, H. parapilulifera and H. stellata. This group is characterized by having conidia that are white in mass and is the only lineage within Hypocrea characterized by such conidia. The second group includes the green conidial T. minutisporum and H. lacuwombatensis. The partition homogeneity test reveals significant recombination within former, ìwhite-conidiaî species, but not within the ìminutisporumî lineage.
S1202	C. M. Lubbe;S. Denman;P. F. Cannon;J. Z. Groenewald;S. C. Lamprecht;P. W. Crous	2003	Characterization of Colletotrichum species associated with anthracnose and dieback of Proteaceae	Mycologia							Colletotrichum spp. are known to occur on and cause diseases of Proteaceae, but their identities are confused and poorly understood. In this study, Colletotrichum spp. associated with proteaceous hosts growing in various parts of the world were identified based on morphology, sequence data of the internal transcribed spacer region (ITS-1, ITS-2), the 5.8S gene, and partial sequences of the ß-tubulin gene. Four species of Colletotrichum were associated with Proteaceae. Colletotrichum gloeosporioides was isolated from Protea cynaroides cultivated in South Africa and Zimbabwe and from a Leucospermum sp. in Portugal, but is known to occur worldwide on numerous hosts. A recently described species, C. boninense, was associated with Zimbabwean and Australian Proteaceae, but also occurred on a Eucalyptus sp. in South Africa. This represents a major geographical and host extension for the species, and a description of the African strains is provided. Colletotrichum crassipes was represented by a single isolate obtained from a Dryandra plant in Madeira. Colletotrichum acutatum was isolated from Protea and Leucadendron in South Africa as well as from other hosts occurring elsewhere. A pathologically distinct population of this species was found to occur on Hakea in South Africa, This population is characterized, and relationships with other C. acutatum populations are discussed.
S955	M. Lutz;R. Bauer;D. Begerow;F. Oberwinkler;D. Triebel	2003	Tuberculina: rust relatives attack rusts	Mycologia							Molecular sequence data together with ultrastructural features were used in order to infer the phylogenetic position of Tuberculina species. Additional ultrastructural characteristics were used to determine their mode of nutrition. We investigated ultrastructural morphology of the type species Tuberculina persicina and determined base sequences from the D1/D2 region of the nuclear large subunit ribosomal DNA of the three commonly distinguished Tuberculina species T. maxima, T. persicina, and T. sbrozzii. Analyses of sequence data by means of a Bayesian method of phylogenetic inference using a Markov chain Monte Carlo technique reveal the basidiomycetous nature of Tuberculina. Within the Urediniomycetes, Tuberculina clusters as sister group of Helicobasidium, in close relationship to the rusts (Uredinales). This phylogenetic position is supported by the uredinalean architecture of septal pores in Tuberculina. In addition, we present aspects of the ultrastructural morphology of the cellular interaction of Tuberculina and rusts showing a unique interaction with large fusion pores. That indicates actual mycoparasitism of Tuberculina on its close relatives, the rusts.
S774	F. N. Martin;P. W. Tooley	2003	Phylogenetic relationships among Phytophthora species inferred from sequence analysis of the mitochondrially-encoded cytochrome oxidase I and II gene	Mycologia	95	2	269-284				The phylogenetic relationships of 51 isolates representing 27 species of Phytophthora were assessed by sequence alignment of 568 bp of the mitochondrially-encoded cytochrome oxidase II gene. A total of 1299 bp of the cytochrome oxidase I gene also was examined for a subset of 13 species. The cox II gene trees constructed by a heuristic search based on maximum parsimony for a bootstrap 50% majority-rule consensus tree revealed 18 species grouping into 7 clades and 9 species unaffiliated with a specific clade. The phylogenetic relationships among species observed on cox II gene trees did not exhibit consistent similarities in groupings for morphology, pathogenicity, host range or temperature optima. The topology of the cox I gene trees constructed by a heuristic search based on maximum parsimony for a bootstrap 50% majority-rule consensus tree for 13 species of Phytophthora revealed 10 species grouping into 3 clades and 3 species unaffiliated with a specific clade. The groupings in general agreed with what was observed in the cox II tree. Species relationships observed for the cox II gene tree were in general agreement with those based on ITS regions, with some notable exceptions. Analysis of combined data sets of ITS and cox II generated a tree that did not differ substantially from analysis of ITS data alone, however, the results of a partition homogeneity test suggest that combining data sets may not be valid.
S726	R. H. Nilsson;N. Hallenberg	2003	Phylogeny of the Hypochnicium punctulatum complex as inferred from ITS sequence data	Mycologia	95	1	54-60		http://www.mycologia.org/cgi/content/abstract/95/1/54	Corticiaceae; Hypochnicium; ITS; ribosomal DNA; parsimony; phylogeny; species complex	Parsimony analysis based on ITS sequence data was carried out to investigate the Hypochnicium punctulatum complex (Basidiomycota). The study gives full support to earlier, crossing test-based species delimitations. Altogether, 18 specimens were sequenced and their spore sizes plotted together with measurements from the corresponding type specimens. Spore sizes were found to cluster readily into four groups, all of which were supported by the phylogenetic analysis. However, in the case of H. punctulatum and H. albostramineum, the morphological delimitation is unsatisfactory and a zone of potential spore size overlap is shown to exist. The new combination Hypochnicium cremicolor is proposed for a species previously known as a small-spored taxon in the H. punctulatum complex, and H. caucasicum is shown to be a younger synonym to H. wakefieldiae. A key to the species is provided.
S929	J. Nuytinck;A. Verbeken;A. C. Rinaldi;M. Leonardi;G. Pacioni;O. Comandini	2003	Characterisation of Lactarius tesquorum ectomycorrhizae on Cistus sp. and molecular phylogeny of related European Lactarius taxa	Mycologia							Lactarius is one of the larger genera of ectomycorrhizal Basidiomycota, with about 400 species recognized worldwide. The ectomycorrhizae formed by Lactarius tesquorum on Cistus sp., one of the most common and ecologically relevant shrubs in the semi-arid regions in the Mediterranean basin, are described here in terms of morphological, anatomical, and molecular features. An ITS rDNA sequence-based phylogenetic analysis was performed on the related European Lactarius taxa (L. mairei, L. pubescens, L. scoticus, L. spinosulus, L. torminosulus and L. torminosus) currently classified together with L. tesquorum in the subgenus Piperites section Piperites. The Piperites s.s. could be divided into two main clusters; L. mairei and especially L. spinosulus were less closely related to the other taxa. This study is part of a broader frame aiming at extending our knowledge of the distribution, phylogeny, and ectomycorrhizal biology of Lactarius species in selected ecosystems.
S843	S. Ortiz-García;D. S. Gernandt;J. K. Stone;P. R. Johnston;I. H. Chapela;R. Salas-Lizana;E. R. Alvarez-Buylla	2003	Phylogenetics of Lophodermium from pine	Mycologia							Lophodermium comprises ascomycetous fungi that are both needle cast pathogens and asymptomatic endophytes on a diversity of plant hosts. It is distinguished from other genera in the family Rhytismataceae by its filiform ascospores and ascocarps that open by a longitudinal slit. Nucleotide sequences of the internal transcribed spacer (ITS) region of nuclear ribosomal DNA were used to infer phylogenetic relationships within Lophodermium. Twenty-nine sequences from approximately 11 species of Lophodermium were analyzed together with eight sequences from isolates thought to represent six other genera of Rhytismataceae: Elytroderma, Lirula, Meloderma, Terriera, Tryblidiopsis, and Colpoma. Two putative Meloderma desmazieri isolates occurred within the Lophodermium clade but separate from one another; one grouped with L. indianum, and the other with L. nitens. An isolate of Elytroderma deformans also occurred within the Lophodermium clade, but on a solitary branch. We attribute the occurrence of these genera within the Lophodermium clade to either problems in generic concepts in Rhytismataceae (such as emphasis on spore morphology to delimit genera), or to difficulty of isolating Rhytismataceae needle pathogens from material that is also colonized by Lophodermium. We also evaluated the congruence of host distribution and several morphological characters on the ITS phylogeny. Lophodermium species from pine hosts formed a monophyletic sister group to Lophodermium species from more distant angiosperm hosts from the southern hemisphere but not to L. picea from Picea. The ITS topology indicated that Lophodermium does not show strict cospeciation with pines at deeper branches, although several closely related isolates have closely related hosts. Pathogenic species occupy derived positions in the pine clade suggesting that pathogenicity has evolved from endophytism.
S891	T. L. Peever;G. Su;L. Carpenter-Boggs;L. W. Timmer	2003	Molecular systematics of citrus-associated Alternaria species	Mycologia	96	1	119-134				The causal agents of Alternaria brown spot of tangerines, tangerine hybrids and Alternaria leaf spot of rough lemon have historically been referred to as Alternaria citri or A. alternata. Ten species of Alternaria were recently described among a set of isolates from leaf lesions on rough lemon (Citrus jambhiri) and tangelo (C. paradisi x C. reticulata) and none of these isolates was considered representative of A. alternata or A. citri. To test the hypothesis that these newly described morphological species are congruent with phylogenetic species, selected Alternaria brown spot and leaf spot isolates, citrus black rot isolates (post-harvest pathogens), isolates associated with healthy citrus tissue, and reference species of Alternaria from non-citrus hosts were scored for sequence variation at five genomic regions and used to estimate phylogenies. These data included 432 bp from the 5' end of the mitochondrial ribosomal large subunit (mtLSU), 365 bp from the 5' end of the beta-tubulin gene, 464 bp of an endopolygalacturonase gene (endoPG) and 559 and 571 bp, respectively, of two anonymous genomic regions (OPA1-3 and OPA2-1). The mtLSU and beta-tubulin phylogenies clearly differentiated A. limicola, a large-spored species causing leaf spot of Mexican lime, from the small-spored isolates associated with citrus but were insufficiently variable to resolve evolutionary relationships among the small-spored isolates from citrus and other hosts. Sequence analysis of translation elongation factor alpha, calmodulin, actin, chitin synthase and 1, 3, 8-trihydroxynaphthalene reductase genes similarly failed to uncover significant variation among the small-spored isolates. Phylogenies estimated independently from endoPG, OPA1-3 and OPA2-1 data were congruent and analysis of the combined data from these regions revealed 9 clades, 8 of which contained small-spored, citrus-associated isolates. Lineages inferred from analysis of the combined dataset were in general agreement with described morphospecies, however, three clades contained more than one morphological species and one morphospecies (A. citrimacularis) was polyphyletic. Citrus black rot isolates were also found to be members of more than a single lineage. The number of morphospecies associated with citrus exceeded that which could be supported under a phylogenetic species concept and isolates in only 5 of 9 phylogenetic lineages were consistently correlated with a specific host, disease or ecological niche on citrus. We advocate collapsing all small-spored, citrus-associated isolates of Alternaria into a single phylogenetic species, A. alternata.
S811	S. W. Peterson;J. Pérez;F. E. Vega;F. Infante	2003	Penicillium brocae, a new species associated with the coffee berry borer in Chiapas, Mexico	Mycologia	95	1	141-147		http://www.mycologia.org/cgi/content/abstract/95/1/141	broca; DNA sequences; fungi; internal transcribed spacer; ribosomal DNA; Scolytidae; Trichocomaceae	Penicillium brocae is a new monoverticillate species isolated from coffee berry borers collected at coffee plantations in Mexico near Cacahoatán, Chiapas, and from borers reared on artificial diets at ECOSUR laboratory facilities in Tapachula, Chiapas. Phenotypically, it is in Penicillium series Implicatum, but because it does not conform to known species we have described it as new. ITS and large subunit rDNA were sequenced and compared to determine the phylogenetic position of this species. It is most closely related to Penicillium adametzii. Penicillium brocae has only been found in association with the coffee berry borer and is one of several fungi that grow in coffee berry borer galleries. Penicillium brocae may provide the exogenous sterols necessary for the coffee berry borer's development and thus be mutualistically associated with the insect.
S954	B. M. Pryor;D. M. Bigelow	2003	Molecular characterization of Embellisia and Nimbya species and their relationship to Alternaria, Ulocladium, and Stemphylium	Mycologia	95						DNA sequences from rDNA and protein-coding regions were determined for six Embellisia and two Nimbya spp. species and were compared to those from Alternaria, Ulocladium and Stemphylium spp. Sequences determined included rDNA from the nuclear internal transcribed-spacer region (ITS1/5.8S/ITS2) and the mitochondrial small subunit (SSU), and a portion of the glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase gene (gpd). Phylogenetic analyses were performed on each dataset separately and then combined for total evidence analysis using methods of maximum parsimony and maximum likelihood. Results revealed that Embellisia and Nimbya clustered within a large monophyletic Alternaria-Nimbya-Embellisia-Ulocladium clade with Stemphylium as the sister taxon. Members of the A. infectoria species group were the most basal group in this large polygeneric clade. Embellisia and Nimbya were sister taxa of the remaining Alternaria and Ulocladium spp. and were related more closely to Alternaria than was Stemphylium. Four Embellisia spp. formed a monophyletic clade. However, E. allii clustered with the two Nimbya spp., and E. indefessa clustered with Alternaria and Ulocladium spp., revealing that Embellisia, as currently circumscribed, is polyphyletic. Potential revisions of taxonomy for all genera are discussed.
S882	K. Skovgaard;S. Rosendahl;K. O'Donnell;H. I. Nirenberg	2003	Fusarium commune is a new species identified by morphological and molecular phylogenetic data	Mycologia	95	4	630-636				Fusarium commune sp. nov. was isolated from soil and Pisum sativum in Denmark and several geographically widespread locations within the northern hemisphere from diverse substrates including white pine, Douglas fir, carnation, corn, carrot, barley and soil. Fusarium commune is characterised by and distinguished from its putative sister taxon, the F. oxysporum complex, in having long, slender monophialides and polyphialides when cultured in complete darkness. Based on the combined DNA sequence data from translation elongation factor 1a (EF-1a) and the mitochondrial small subunit ribosomal DNA (mtSSU rDNA), the fifteen isolates of F. commune analysed formed a strongly supported clade closely related to but independent of the F. oxysporum and the Gibberella fujikuroi species complexes.
S861	B. Slippers;P. W. Crous;S. Denman;T. A. Coutinho;B. D. Wingfield;M. J. Wingfield	2003	Combined multiple gene genealogies and phenotype characters differentiate several species previously identified as Botryosphaeria dothidea	Mycologia							Botryosphaeria dothidea is one of the most commonly reported species in a genus of important pathogens of woody plants. This taxon is generally accepted to represent a species complex, and hence its identity remains unclear. Previous studies have either treated B. dothidea as the valid name for B. ribis and B. berengeriana, or argued for them to be separate entities. To add to the confusion, no ex-type cultures are available for either B. dothidea or B. ribis. The aim of the present study, therefore, was to recollect and characterize these fungi, and designate a set of reference cultures that can be used in future studies. To this end morphological, cultural, and multi-allelic DNA sequence data sets from the rDNA (ITS 1, 5.8S, and ITS 2), b-tubulin and EF1-a genes were used to fully characterize these species. Botryosphaeria dothidea was found to be distinct from B. ribis, while B. berengeriana was retained as synonym of the former name. Furthermore, Fusicoccum aesculi is accepted as anamorph of B. dothidea, while the anamorph of B. ribis is newly described as F. ribis sp. nov. Botryosphaeria ribis could be distinguished from B. parva based on b-tubulin and EF1-a sequence data. A combined phylogeny of the three gene regions used in this study also showed that the genus Botryosphaeria represents two distinct phylogenetic assemblages that correspond to species with Diplodia and Fusicoccum anamorphs.
S991	J. M. van Niekerk;P. W. Crous;J. Z. Groenewald;P. H. Fourie;F. Halleen	2003	DNA phylogeny and morphological characterization of Botryosphaeria species occurring on grapevines	Mycologia							Several species of Botryosphaeria are known to occur on grapevines, causing a wide range of disorders including bud mortality, dieback, brown wood streaking and bunch rot. In the present study the 11 Botryosphaeria spp. associated with grapevines growing in various parts of the world, but specifically in South Africa, were distinguished based on morphology, DNA sequences (ITS-1, 5.8S, ITS-2 and EF-1a) and pathological data. Botryosphaeria australe, B. lutea, B. obtusa, B. parva, B. rhodina and a Diplodia sp. were confirmed from vines in South Africa, while Diplodia porosum, Fusicoccum viticlavatum and F. vitifusiforme were described as new. Although isolates of B. dothidea and B. stevensii were confirmed from grapevines in Portugal, none of these two was found among the isolates obtained in South Africa, nor were any isolates of B. ribis confirmed from grapevines. All grapevine isolates formerly presumed to be B. ribis, were identified as B. parva based on their EF-1a sequence data. From artificial inoculations on grapevine shoots, we conclude that B. ribis, B. australe, B. stevensii and B. parva were more virulent that the other species studied. The Diplodia sp. collected from grapevine canes was morphologically similar, but phylogenetically distinct from D. sarmentorum. Diplodia sarmentorum was confirmed as anamorph of Otthia spiraeae, the type species of the genus Otthia (Botryosphaeriaceae), which phylogenetically clustered within Botryosphaeria and is therefore synonymized with it. These findings confirm earlier suggestions that the generic concept of Botryosphaeria should be expanded to include genera with septate ascospores and Diplodia anamorphs.
S782	E. C. Vellinga;R. P. J. de Kok;T. D. Bruns	2003	Phylogeny and taxonomy of Macrolepiota (Agaricaceae)	Mycologia	95	3	442-456			Agaricaceae; Chlorophyllum; Endoptychum; ITS and LSU rDNA; phylogeny	The position and composition of Macrolepiota within the Agaricaceae and its phylogenetic relationships with other members of the family were investigated, using both molecular (ITS and LSU rDNA sequences) and morphological characters. The molecular data separate the genus into two clades. The first clade comprises M. procera, M. mastoidea, M. clelandii and allies and is a sister group of Leucoagaricus and Leucocoprinus. The second, more diverse, clade, with M. rachodes and allies, M. globosa, Chlorophyllum molybdites, Leucoagaricus hortensis and Endoptychum agaricoides, is a sister group of Agaricus. The separation of the two clades is supported by morphological characters, such as the structure of the pileus covering, the stipitipellis and the shape of the germ pore and the spore apex. The two clades are regarded as genera for which the names Macrolepiota and Chlorophyllum are proposed. Macrolepiota nympharum does not belong to either clade but is assigned to the genus Leucoagaricus, close to L. leucothites. Endoptychum depressum is transferred to the genus Agaricus as A. inapertus.
S883	L. Guzman-Davalos;G. M. Mueller;J. Cifuentes;A. N. Miller;A. Santerre	2003	Traditional infrageneric classification of Gymnopilus is not supported by ribosomal DNA sequence data	Mycologia	95	6	1204-1214				The traditional classification of Gymnopilus (Agaricales) recognizes two primary groups: Annulati and Gymnopilus, based on the presence or absence of a membranous partial veil. While our analyses of DNA sequence data from the nuclear ribosomal ITS1-5.8S-ITS2 gene supports the monophyly of the genus, these traditional subgroups were not recovered. Five well-supported clades within the genus were identified through these analyses: 1) the spectabilis-imperialis group; 2) the nevadense-penetrans group; 3) a clade formed by G. underwoodii, G. validipes and G. cf. flavidellus; 4) the aeruginosus-luteofolius group and 5) the lepidotus-subearlei group. Relationships among these subgroups were not resolved.
S949	A. Alves;A. Correia;J. Luque;A. J. L. Phillips	2004	Botryosphaeria corticola sp. nov. on Quercus species, with notes and description of Botryosphaeria stevensii and its anamorph Diplodia mutila	Mycologia	96	3	598-613				Botryosphaeria stevensii has frequently been associated with dieback and canker diseases of oaks, mainly in the Western Mediterranean area but more rarely in other regions. The species concept of B. stevensii has been unclear, and it is possible that some collections were incorrectly identified. A collection of fungal strains isolated from diseased oak trees and initially identified as B. stevensii was characterized on the basis of morphology and ITS nucleotide sequences. Morphology was compared with the type specimens of Physalospora mutila (= B. stevensii) and its anamorph Diplodia mutila. It was concluded that the isolates from oaks differed from B. stevensii in having larger ascospores and conidia as well as different spore shapes, and represented an as yet undescribed species, which is described here as B. corticola. Moreover, ITS sequence data separated B. corticola from all other known species of Botryosphaeria. Amended descriptions of B. stevensii and its anamorph are provided to differentiate B. stevensii from B. corticola and to clarify some of the earlier taxonomic uncertainties.
S1040	F. Arenal;G. Platas;F. Pelúez	2004	Sporormiella africana and Sporormiella pseudominima, two new Sporormiella species based on morphological and molecular evidences	Mycologia							Two new Sporormiella species from plant debris and coprophilous habitat are newly described and illustrated based on molecular and morphological data: Sporormiella africana from Spain and South Africa; and Sporormiella pseudominima from Puerto Rico and Kenya. Morphologically, Sporormiella africana and Sporormiella pseudominima seems to be closely to S. autralis, S. intermedia, S. minimoides and S. minima, respectively. Based on three genomic regions studied, entire ITS, 5¬¥end of 28S and EF-1Œ±, both species formed strongly supported monophyletic clades and closely phylogenetic relationships with the species to which it is morphologically most similar.
S1213	J. F. Bischoff;R. F. Sullivan;K. M. Kjer;J. F. W. Jr	2004	Phylogenetic placement of the anamorphic tribe Ustilaginoideae (Hypocreales, Ascomycota)	Mycologia	96		1088-1094				Tribe Ustilaginoideae (Hypocreales, Ascomycetes) is made up of three anamorph genera, Munkia, Neomunkia and Ustilaginoidea. Species of Munkia and Neomunkia develop on the culms of bamboo (Chusquea spp.) and have a neotropical distribution while species of Ustilaginoidea infect the florets of various grasses and are pantropical in distribution. In this study we evaluated the phylogeny of the tribe and assessed hypotheses regarding its affinity to clavicipitalean teleomorphic groups. To support phylogenetic analyses, morphology of representatives of several key species of Ustilaginoideae was examined also. Phylogenetic analyses using sequences of the large subunit of the ribosomal RNA gene suggest that members of Ustilaginoideae are distinct from teleomorphic genera of Clavicipitaceae and that Ustilaginoideae should be recognized as a monophyletic group within Hypocreales. However, phylogenetic analyses did not resolve the placement of Ustilaginoideae in Clavicipitaceae or Hypocreaceae, suggesting that it might be a distinct lineage within Hypocreales. This evaluation supported the monophyly of tribes Balansieae and Clavicipeae in the family Clavicipitaceae.
S1078	O. Blanco;A. Crespo;P. K. Divakar;J. A. Elix;H. T. Lumbsch	2004	Molecular phylogeny of parmotremoid lichens (Ascomycota, Parmeliaceae)	Mycologia							Parmotrema is one of the larger genera segregated from Parmelia s. lat. More recently some further genera have been segregated from this large genus based mainly on morphological and chemical features. We have employed molecular data from three genes to revise the generic concept within the parmotremoid lichens. A bayesian analysis of nuclear its, lsu rDNA and mitochondrial SSU rDNA sequences have been performed. The genera Canomaculina, Concamerella, Parmelaria and Rimelia appear nested within Parmotrema. Alternative hypotheses to maintain the independence of canomaculina, concamerella and rimelia are shown to be highly unlikely and are rejected. As a consequence these three genera are reduced to synonymy with parmotrema. An alternative topology segregating parmelaria from parmotrema s. Lat cannot be rejected with the data set at hand. However, we have established that this genus is closely related to Parmotrema rather than to Cetrarioid species as was considered previously. The revised genus Parmotrema includes species which have an upper cortex consisting of a palisade plectenchyma or rarely paraplectectenchyma with vaults, have a pored epicortex, lack pseudocyphellae, have or lack cilia, have laminal, perforate or eperforate apothecia, usually have simple rhizines and filiform, cylindrical, bacilliform or sublageniform conidia. It is closely related to canoparmelia and flavoparmelia but the status of these genera requires further investigation. 20 New combinations are made.
S1226	J. W. Cary;M. A. Klich;S. B. Beltz	2004	Characterization of aflatoxin-producing fungi outside of Aspergillus section Flavi	Mycologia							Most aspergilli that produce aflatoxin are members of Aspergillus section Flavi, however isolates of several Aspergillus species not closely related to section Flavi also have been found to produce aflatoxin. Two of the species, Aspergillus ochraceoroseus and an undescribed Aspergillus species SRRC 1468, are morphologically similar to members of Aspergillus section Circumdati. The other species have Emericella teleomorphs (Em. astellata and an undescribed Emericella species SRRC 2520) and are morphologically distinctive in having ascospores with large flanges. All of these aflatoxin-producing isolates were from tropical zones near oceans and none of them grew on artificial media at 37 C. Aflatoxins and sterigmatocystin production were quantified by high-pressure liquid chromatography (HPLC) and confirmed by HPLC-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) detection. Phylogenetic analyses were conducted on the these four species using A. parasiticus and Em. nidulans, (which produce aflatoxin and the aflatoxin precursor sterigmatocystin, respectively) for comparison. Two aflatoxin/sterigmatocystin biosynthesis genes and the beta tubulin gene were used in the analyses. Results showed that of the new aflatoxin-producers, Aspergillus SRRC 1468 forms a strongly supported clade with A. ochraceoroseus as does Emericella SRRC 2520 with Em. astellata SRRC 503 and 512.
S1115	P. Chaverri;G. J. Samuels;K. T. Hodge	2004	The genus Podocrella and its nematode-killing anamorph Harposporium	Mycologia							Several genera are mentioned in the literature as having similar morphology as the clavicipitaceous genus Podocrella, viz. Atricordyceps, Ophiocordyceps, Wakefieldiomyces, and „Cordyceps‰ peltata. These genera have capitate-stipitate stromata that gradually expand into a vertically flattened fruiting head with strongly protruding perithecia, dark in color, and with eight multiseptate filiform ascospores that disarticulate at the middle septum to form two lanceolate multiseptate part-ascospores. In this study, several specimens of the above mentioned species, including the types, were examined in order to determine if they were congeneric with Podocrella. In addition, this study reveals the connection of Podocrella to its anamorph genus, Harposporium, and its relationship to several other clavicipitaceous genera, based on morphological data and large subunit nuclear ribosomal DNA (LSU) sequences. The results show that Podocrella and selected Harposporium LSU sequences form a monophyletic group and that this clade is closely related to Aschersonia. A new species of Podocrella from Costa Rica, P. fusca, is described and a key to the known species is presented.
S1012	A. Holst-Jensen;T. Vralstad;T. Schumacher	2004	Kohninia linnaeicola - a new genus and species of the Sclerotiniaceae pathogenic to Linnaea borealis	Mycologia	96		136-143				A new genus and species is described to accommodate a newly discovered fungus pathogenic to Linnaea borealis. The fungus forms true sclerotia on stems and leaves of its host, and apothecia arise singly or gregarious on the surface of ripe sclerotia. The new fungus was collected together with a conidiomatal anamorphic fungus that occurred on the same host. A putative teleomorph - anamorph-connection of the observed taxa was ruled out by sequence comparison of the nuclear ribosomal internal transcribed spacer DNA sequences (ITS nrDNA). Based on morphology and pathogenicity, the new fungus belongs in the family Sclerotiniaceae, Helotiales, Ascomycota. A phylogenetic analysis of ITS nrDNA sequences from 26 taxa of the family Sclerotiniaceae was performed in order to conclude on the systematic position of the new fungus. The small tuberoid sclerotia, brownish subsessile to substipitate apothecia, four-spored asci, ellipsoid to isthmoid ascospores, inability to grow on PDA culture media, and a number of ITS nrDNA sequence autapomorphies characterize and distinguish the fungus from other taxa of the Sclerotiniaceae.
S1151	S. L. F. Meyer;L. K. Carta;S. A. Rehner	2004	Morphological variability and molecular phylogeny of the nematophagous fungus Monacrosporium drechsleri	Mycologia							An isolate of the nematode-trapping fungus Monacrosporium drechsleri was collected from cultures of the root-knot nematode Meloidogyne arenaria that had been maintained on tomato roots in greenhouse pots in Beltsville, Maryland, USA. To study host range of the isolate, the plant-parasitic nematodes Heterodera glycines, Meloidogyne incognita, and Pratylenchus zeae, and the free-living nematodes Caenorhabditis elegans and Panagrellus redivivus, were placed on fungal colonies of M. drechsleri grown in Petri dishes. Within one day, none of the nematodes placed near adhesive knobs were motile. To determine where M. drechsleri fits within the existing phylogeny of nematode-trapping fungi, the ITS-1 and 2 regions of rDNA and the nuclear gene EF1-a were sequenced in this study for the new isolate of M. drechsleri, for M. parvicolle, and for isolates of M. lysipagum and M. ellipsosporum distinct from those in Genbank. Parsimony trees were constructed showing the closest molecular relative of M. drechsleri to be the newly sequenced isolate of M. ellipsosporum; the latter had a highly divergent sequence from the morphological isolate of M. ellipsosporum recorded in GenBank. Because unique, ever-present and discrete morphological characters are absent in these related taxa, an independent molecular character should be considered essential for their accurate and rapid identification.
S1136	A. N. Miller;S. M. Huhndorf	2004	Using phylogenetic species recognition to delimit species boundaries within Lasiosphaeria	Mycologia	96	5	1104-1125				The genus Lasiosphaeria has recently been more narrowly circumscribed to include five morphospecies united by tomentose ascomata containing yellow centrum pigments. Species boundaries have not been established and phylogenetic relationships have not been clearly defined for these morphospecies. To delimit species boundaries and determine phylogenetic relationships among species, maximum parsimony, maximum likelihood, and Bayesian analyses were conducted on sequence data from four nuclear genes, the ribosomal internal transcribed spacer (ITS) region, 28S large subunit (LSU) rDNA, b-tubulin, and ribosomal polymerase II subunit 2 (RPB2). Representatives of L. glabrata, L. ovina, L. rugulosa, and L. sorbina resolved as four highly-supported monophyletic groups in almost all analyses and are recognized as well-defined species employing principles of genealogical concordance. These species delimitations are further corroborated by morphology. Representatives of L. lanuginosa were polyphyletic in almost all analyses. Although molecular analyses revealed that this morphospecies comprises several phylogenetic species, formal taxonomic recognition of these different lineages is premature so L. lanuginosa is currently treated as a morphological species complex. Complete species descriptions including teleomorph, anamorph, and culture characteristics are given for L. glabrata, L. ovina, L. sorbina and the L. lanuginosa species complex along with detailed discussions of significant morphological characters used in recognizing species. These species are compared to five additional morphospecies which may also belong in the genus.
S1128	H. Myburg;M. Gryzenhout;B. D. Wingfield;R. J. Stipes;M. J. Wingfield	2004	Phylogenetic relationships of Cryphonectria and Endothia species, based on DNA sequence data and morphology	Mycologia							The fungal genera Endothia and Cryphonectria include some of the most important pathogens of forest trees. Despite available new technology, no comprehensive comparative study based on DNA sequence data and morphology has been done on the available isolates representing these two genera. The main objectives of this study were to assess the phylogenetic relationships among species of Cryphonectria and Endothia for which cultures are available, and to establish a taxonomic framework based on DNA sequence and morphological data, which will aid future studies and identification of species residing in these and related genera. Comparisons were based on sequence variation found in the ITS region of the ribosomal RNA operon and two regions of the b-tubulin gene. In addition, the morphology of these species was also examined. The phylogenetic data indicated that Endothia and Cryphonectria reside in two distinct phylogenetic clades. Cryphonectria parasitica, C. macrospora, C. nitschkei, C. eucalypti and C. radicalis represented the Cryphonectria clade. Endothia gyrosa and E. singularis were included in the Endothia clade. An isolate representing E. viridistroma grouped outside the Endothia clade and separately from other groups. Other clades outside the one encompassing Cryphonectria were those represented by the C. cubensis isolates and fungi isolated from Elaeocarpus dentatus originating from New Zealand. These clades could be distinguished from Endothia and Cryphonectria, based on anamorph morphology, stromatal structure and ascospore septation. Cryphonectria and Endothia, therefore, appear to be paraphyletic and taxonomic relationships for these fungi need to be revised.
S1204	S. W. Peterson;E. M. Bayer;D. T. Wicklow	2004	Penicillium thiersii, Penicillium angulare and Penicillium decaturense, new species isolated from wood-decay fungi in North America and their phylogenetic placement from multilocus DNA sequence analysis	Mycologia							We describe three new fungicolous species on the basis of phenotypic and phylogenetic differences from known species. Penicillium thiersii and P. angulare are monoverticillate, Penicillium decaturense is furcate. P. thiersii is phenotypically identified on the basis of several characteristics including growth rates, vesicle size and condium shape and roughening. Penicillium angulare is most closely related to P. adametzioides, and is distinguished from it by restricted growth rates and conidiophores greater than 60 µm in length. Penicillium decaturense is most closely related to P. miczynskii and is distinguished from that species by growth rate, minimum growth temperature and pigment production on MEA. Multilocus phylogenetic analysis confirmed the genetic distinctness of P. decaturense, and the closely related species P. miczynskii, P. chrzaszczii and P. manginii. Penicillium rivolii is a synonym of P. waksmanii on the basis of this analysis. Analysis of the tef 1-alpha gene shows rapid changes of position, number and length of introns between the species, suggesting a recent evolutionary origin for the introns.
S1161	A. J. L. Phillips;A. Alves;A. Correia;J. Luque	2004	Two new species of Botryosphaeria with brown, one-septate ascospores and Dothiorella anamorphs	Mycologia							Botryosphaeria sarmentorum sp. nov. and B. iberica sp. nov. are described and illustrated. These two species are unusual in this genus on account of their brown, one-septate ascospores. Phylogenetic analysis based on ITS and EF1-a sequences place them within the clade containing species with Fusicoccum anamorphs. The brown, one-septate conidia, however, do not conform to Fusicoccum. Therefore, phylogenetically and morphologically the anamorphs of these two species belong in a genus distinct from any of the currently accepted anamorph genera assigned to Botryosphaeria. Through a study of the type species of Dothiorella this genus is resurrected to accommodate anamorphs of Botryosphaeria with brown, one-septate conidia. Botryosphaeria sarmentorum is shown to be the teleomorph of Diplodia sarmentorum, which in turn is transferred to Dothiorella. Otthia quercus is transferred to Botryosphaeria as B. quercicola nom. nov.
S1059	U. Pinruan;J. Sakayaroj;E. B. G. Jones;K. D. Hyde	2004	Aquatic fungi from peat swamp palms: Phruensis brunneispora gen. et sp. nov. and its hyphomycete anamorph	Mycologia	96	5	1163-1170				Phruensis brunneispora is a new genus and species occurring on decaying trunks of the palm Licuala longecalycata in Sirindhorn Peat Swamp Forest, Thailand. We compare the genus with other aquatic ascomycetes with falcate septate ascospores: e.g., Pseudohalonectria and Ophioceras. Ascospores differ from species in these genera in being brown with lighter end cells. Also, the ascus pore is subapical, with a channel leading to the apex. Lollipopaia minuta differs from Phruensis brunneispora in that the ascomata are borne in a stroma, asci have an apical pore and the ascospores are hyaline. No genus was found to accommodate the new species. Molecular analysis of rDNA ribosomal 18S confirmed the exclusion of the new species from Pseudohalonectria and Ophioceras and Lollipopaia minuta formed a sister group with it. Phruensis brunneispora and Lollipopaia minuta grouped in the Diaporthales with 100% bootstrap support. Therefore, both morphological and molecular evidence support erecting a new genus to accommodate this taxon. A hyaline Phialophora-like anamorph was formed when single ascospores were plated out on agar. The taxon is described and illustrated with light micrographs.
S1087	I. Schmitt;G. Mueller;H. T. Lumbsch	2004	Ascocarp morphology is homoplaseous and phylogenetically misleading in some pyrenocarpous lichens	Mycologia							The phylogentic relationships of many lichen-forming perithecioid ascomycetes are currently unknown. We generated nuLSU and mtSSU rDNA sequences of members of seven families of pyrenocarpous lichens, and used a Bayesian framework to infer a phylogenetic estimate. Members of the perithecioid Protothelenellaceae, Thelenellaceae, and Thrombiaceae surprisingly cluster within the mainly discocarpous Lecanoromycetes, while Strigulaceae, Verrucariaceae, and Pyrenulaceae are related to the ascolocular Chaetothyriomycetes. Micromorphological studies of the ascomata showed that the two main groups of pyrenocarpous lichen-forming fungi differ in their ascus types. The Strigulaceae, Verrucariaceae, and Pyrenulaceae have apically and laterally thick-walled asci, whereas the Thelenellaceae, Protothelenellaceae and Thrombiaceae have only apically thickened asci. The latter two show ring-shaped amyloid apical structures. Based on morphological and molecular evidence we propose to reduce Thrombiaceae to synonymy with Protothelenellaceae.
S1107	H. J. Schroers;M. H. Schoeman;M. M. Geldenhuis;M. J. Wingfield;B. D. Wingfield	2004	Taxonomy of Nalanthamala	Mycologia							
S1004	K. A. Seifert;H. Boulay	2004	Hirsutella uncinata, a new hyphomycete from Australia	Mycologia							Hirsutella uncinata, collected on follicles of Hakea sp. in New South Wales, Australia, is described as a new anamorph species. The fungus produces stiff, erect, verticillate conidiophores with up to ten whorls of recurved, phialidic conidiogenous cells that have rough-walled necks. The conidia are subfusiform, flattened on one side and produced in groups of two to three in a dense mucoid ball at the end of each phialide. Parsimony analysis of aligned internal transcribed spacer rDNA sequences suggests that H. uncinata is closely related to the Cordyceps sinensis complex (Clavicipitaceae, Hypocreales), which includes species with morphologically similar anamorphs.
S1008	B. Slippers;G. Fourie;P. W. Crous;T. A. Coutinho;B. D. Wingfield;M. J. Wingfield	2004	Multiple gene sequences delimit Botryosphaeria australis sp. nov. from B. lutea	Mycologia							Botryosphaeria lutea (anamorph Fusicoccum luteum) is most easily distinguished from other Botryosphaeria spp. by a yellow pigment that is formed in young cultures. This fungus has been reported from a number of cultivated hosts in New Zealand and Portugal. During a survey of Botryosphaeria fungi that occur on native Acacia species in Australia, a yellow pigment was observed in some cultures. These isolates were morphologically similar to B. lutea, but the pigment differed slightly from the one formed by authentic B. lutea isolates. Preliminary data also revealed small differences in ITS rDNA sequence data. The aim of this study was to determine whether these small differences were indicative of separate species or merely variations within B. lutea. Anamorph, teleomorph and culture morphology were compared between B. lutea and Acacia isolates from Australia. Sequence data of two other genome regions, namely the É“-tubulin and EF1-É— gene and intron regions, were combined with ITS rDNA sequence data to determine the phylogenetic relationship between these isolates. Isolates of B. lutea and those from Australian Acacia species were not significantly different in spore morphology. The yellow pigment, however, was much more distinct in cultures of B. lutea than in cultures from Acacia. There were only a few base pair variations in each of the analyzed gene regions, but these variations were fixed in the two groups in all regions. By combining these data it was clear that B. lutea and the isolates from Acacia were distinct species, albeit very closely related. We, therefore, propose the new epithet B. australis for the fungus from Australia. Botryosphaeria australis also was isolated in this study from exotic Sequoiadendron trees in Australia. Re-analyses of GenBank data in this study showed that B. australis also occurs on other native Australian hosts, namely a Banksia sp. and a Eucalyptus sp., as well as a native Protea sp. in South Africa and on Pistachio in Italy. These records from GenBank have been identified previously as B. lutea. The common occurrence of B. australis on a variety of native hosts across Australia suggests that this fungus is native to this area.
S1101	B. Slippers;G. I. Johnson;P. W. Crous;T. A. Coutinho;B. D. Wingfield;M. J. Wingfield	2004	Phylogenetic and morphological re-evaluation of the Botryosphaeria species causing diseases of Mangifera indica	Mycologia							Species of Botryosphaeria are among the most serious pathogens that affect mango trees and fruit. Several species occur on mangoes and these are identified based mainly on the morphology of the anamorphs. Common taxa include Dothiorella dominicana, D. mangiferae (= Natrassia mangiferae), D. aromatica and an unidentified species, Dothiorella °•long°¶. The genus name Dothiorella is, however, acknowledged as a synonym of Diplodia. This study aimed to characterize and name the Botryosphaeria spp. associated with disease symptoms on mangoes. To achieve this, isolates representing all four Dothiorella spp. mentioned above were compared with the anamorphs of known Botryosphaeria spp., based on conidial morphology and DNA sequence data. Two genomic regions were analyzed, namely the ITS rDNA and É“-tubulin regions. The morphological and molecular results confirmed that the fungi previously identified from mango as species of Dothiorella belong to Fusicoccum. Dothiorella dominicana isolates were identical to isolates of F. parvum (teleomorph = B. parva). A new epithet, namely F. mangiferum, is proposed for isolates previously treated as D. mangiferae or N. mangiferae. Isolates of D. aromatica were identified as F. aesculi (teleomorph = B. dothidea). A fourth Fusicoccum sp. also was identified as those isolates previously known as Dothiorella °•long°¶. A key is provided to distinguish these species based on anamorph morphology in culture. This study provides a basis for the identification of Botryosphaeria species from mango, which is important for disease control and to uphold quarantine regulations.
S1092	J. A. Smith;G. Newcombe;R. A. Blanchette	2004	Molecular and morphological characterization of the willow rust fungus, Melampsora epitea, from Arctic and temperate hosts in North America	Mycologia							Current taxonomy places all rust fungi that occur on willow (Salix spp.) in North America in one species complex, Melampsora epitea Thuem. Characteristics of M. epitea isolates from the Canadian High Arctic were compared to M. epitea isolates from temperate regions of North America. Sequences from internal transcribed spacer (ITS) regions of rDNA were obtained from urediniospores from rust-infected Salix leaves collected in the Canadian High Arctic and in Minnesota, U.S.A. and compared. Phylogenetic analysis of nuclear ribosomal ITS regions indicated that Arctic M. epitea samples were divergent from temperate M. epitea isolates, perhaps in part because all rusts examined diverged according to host species. Four urediniospore characteristics were examined: area, circularity (shape factor), major axis length and spine density. Statistically significant (P < 0.05) differences were observed for spine density among all host species except S. nigra and S. bebbiana, however, major axis length differed between these species. These results represent the first evidence that Arctic and temperate Melampsora species on Salix hosts in North America have evolved distinct molecular and morphological characters.
S1122	A. Tsuneda;S. Hambleton;R. S. Currah	2004	Morphology and phylogenetic placement of Endoconidioma, a new endoconidial genus from trembling aspen	Mycologia							Endoconidioma populi gen. et sp. nov. is described from black subicula on twigs of trembling aspen, Populus tremuloides, in Alberta, Canada. Pycnidium-like conidiomata are produced on twigs and in culture but unlike pycnidia, conidiomata of E. populi have a closed peridium and a locule filled with conidiogenous cells that form conidia endogenously. These endoconidia are hyaline, unicellular, and released by the dissolution of the peridial cell wall. In addition to endoconidia, mostly two-celled conidia that form blastically from undifferentiated hyphae occur often in culture but are observed only occasionally on Populus twigs. No coelomycetous taxa have been reported to produce endoconidia and both the morphological features and DNA sequence data demonstrate that Endoconidioma is distinct from the previously established endoconidial genera. Parsimony analyses of portions of the nuclear ribosomal RNA gene (SSU and ITS) suggest that Endoconidioma is phylogenetically closely related to members of the Dothideales and allied anamorphs in Hormonema and Kabatina.
S1047	W. A. Untereiner;J. A. Scott;F. A. Naveau;L. Sigler;J. Bachewich;A. Angus	2004	The Ajellomycetaceae, a new family of vertebrate-associated Onygenales	Mycologia							Phylogenies inferred from the analysis of DNA sequence data have shown that the Onygenales contains clades that do not correspond with previously described families. One lineage identified in recent molecular phylogenetic studies includes the dimorphic pathogens belonging to the genera Ajellomyces, Emmonsia and Paracoccidioides. To evaluate the degree of support for this lineage and determine whether it includes additional taxa, we examined relationships among the members of this clade and selected saprobic onygenalean taxa based on maximum parsimony analyses of partial nuclear large RNA subunit (LSU) and internal transcribed spacer (ITS) sequences. A clade distinct from the Onygenaceae was found to encompass Ajellomyces (including the anamorph genera Blastomyces, Emmonsia and Histoplasma) and Paracoccidioides brasiliensis. The members of this lineage are saprobic and pathogenic vertebrate-associated taxa distinguished by their globose ascomata with coiled appendages, muricate globose or oblate ascospores, and lack of keratinolytic activity. Anamorphs are solitary aleurioconidia or irregular alternate arthroconidia. Based on molecular data and on morphological and physiological similarities among these taxa, we propose the new family, Ajellomycetaceae.
S1064	Z. Wang;M. Binder;Y. C. Dai;D. S. Hibbett	2004	Phylogenetic relationships of Sparassis inferred from nuclear and mitochondrial ribosomal DNA and RNA polymerase sequences	Mycologia							Sparassis species show extensive morphological variation, especially when materials from eastern Asia and Australia are compared with collections from North America and Europe. We have been studying the taxonomy of Sparassis from Eastern Asia, North America, Australia and Europe using both morphological and molecular data. DNA was extracted from 32 recent collections of Sparassis from Australia, Canada, China, Finland, France, Germany, Japan, Switzerland, Thailand, the United Kingdom, and the United States. The report of a Sparassis taxon from Australia is the first report of this genus from the southern hemisphere. Sequences of nuclear and mitochondrial rDNA and the gene encoding RNA polymerase subunit II (RPB2) were used to examine relationships both within the genus Sparassis and between Sparassis species and other members of the polyporoid clade. Equally weighted parsimony analyses and Bayesian analyses were performed using independent data sets and combined data sets of sequences from different regions. Our results suggest that: 1) Polyporoid fungi producing a brown rot may form a clade; 2) As suggested in a previous study, Sparassis and Phaeolus form a monophyletic group, which is united by the production of a brown rot, the presence of a bipolar mating system, and the frequent habit of growing as a root and butt rot on living trees; 3) There are at least seven lineages within Sparassis, represented by S. spathulata, S. brevipes, S. crispa, S. radicata and three taxa that have not been described, which can be distinguished on the basis of fruiting body structure, presence or absence of clamp connections, presence or absence of cystidia, and spore size.
S1247	J. F. Bischoff;P. Chaverri;J. F. W. Jr	2005	Clarification of the host substrate of Ascopolyporus and description of Ascopolyporus philodendrus sp. nov	Mycologia							During a recent collection trip to Barro Colorado Island, Panama two species belonging to genus Ascopolyporus (Clavicipitaceae, Hypocreales) were collected. Species of Ascopolyporus are epibionts of their bamboo (Poaceae) host and long thought to be biotrophs of their plant hosts. However, based on morphological observations and phylogenetic evidence using large subunit ribosomal DNA data we propose that genus Ascopolyporus is likely composed of pathogens of scale insects (Coccoideae, Homoptera). Phylogenetic analyses included Ascopolyporus spp. in a clade containing only entomopathogenic clavicipitaceous species (100% posterior propability) and the scale insect pathogen Hyperdermium bertonii was found to share the most recent common ancestor with the Ascopolyporus clade (98% posterior probability). In addition, remnants of the scale insect were observed to be embedded within stromata during early stages of stroma development. Ascopolyporus philodendrus sp. nov. was described and distinguished from the type species of the genus, A. polychrous, based on perithecial size, ascus size, plant host substrate, and phylogenetic evidence. Furthermore, subfamily Clavicipitoideae (Clavicipitaceae) was included and well supported in a single clade (100% posterior probability).
S1264	J. Campbell;B. Volkmann-Kohlmeyer;T. Graefenhan;J. W. Spatafora;J. Kohlmeyer	2005	A re-evaluation of Lulworthiales: relationships based on 18S and 28S rDNA	Mycologia							The Lulworthiales consists of four genera: three that were removed from the Halosphaeriales, namely Lulworthia, Lindra and Kohlmeyeriella; and Spathulospora, reassigned from the Spathulosporales. However, studies have shown that neither Lulworthia nor Lindra are monophyletic genera. This study was therefore undertaken to re-evaluate the genera of the Lulworthiales based on the SSU and LSU rDNA genes. Taxonomic revisions are proposed here for Lulworthia crassa, L. lignoarenaria, L. uniseptata and Lindra marinera: Lulworthia crassa is transferred into the genus Kohlmeyeriella; the new genus Lulwoidea is established for L. lignoarenaria; the new genus Lulwoana is established for L. uniseptata; Lindra marinera is reduced to synonymy with L. thalassiae. Taxonomic descriptions are emended for the genus Lulworthia sensu stricto, and for L. grandispora and Lindra thalassiae. A neotype is designated for Lulworthia grandispora.
S1315	P. Chaverri;J. F. Bischoff;H. C. Evans;K. T. Hodge	2005	Regiocrella, a new entomopathogenic genus with a pycnidial anamorph and its phylogenetic placement in the Clavicipitaceae	Mycologia							A new genus, Regiocrella, is described with two species, R. camerunensis and R. sinensis, based on specimens collected in Cameroon and China. Both species are parasitic on scale insects (Coccidae, Homoptera). Morphological and molecular evidence place the new genus in the Clavicipitaceae (Hypocreales), despite its combination of characters that are atypical of that family: Regiocrella is characterized by having perithecia partly immersed in a subiculum, non-capitate asci, unicellular fusiform ascospores, and pycnidial-acervular conidiomata. The two new species, R. camerunensis and R. sinensis, are distinguished based on ascospore and perithecium size. Morphological characters were evaluated and compared to other genera in the Clavicipitaceae, especially those parasitic on scale insects or with pycnidial-acervular anamorphs or synanamorphs (i.e. Aschersonia, Ephelis, or Sphacelia): Atkinsonella, Balansia, Claviceps, Epichlöe, Hypocrella, Myriogenospora, and Neoclaviceps. The phylogenetic relationships of Regiocrella were examined using three gene loci: large subunit nuclear ribosomal DNA (LSU), translation elongation factor 1-a (TEF), and RNA polymerase II subunit 1 (RPB1). The results of this study confirm that Regiocrella is distinct from other genera in the Clavicipitaceae, and that its two species form a monophyletic group. Regiocrella is shown to be closely related to the scale insect pathogen Hypocrella and the plant-associated genera Balansia, Claviceps, Epichlöe, Myriogenospora, and Neoclaviceps. This study also provides insights into the evolution of pycnidial-acervular conidiomata and scale insect parasitism within the Clavicipitaceae. Plant-associated genera form a monophyletic group correlated with Clavicipitaceae subfamily Clavicipitoideae sensu Diehl. We also demonstrate that scale insect parasites have multiple evolutionary origins within the family and genera with pycnidial-acervular anamorphs or synanamorphs have a single origin.
S2144	J. Collado;G. Platas;G. F. Bills;A. Basilio;M. F. Vicente;J. R. Tormo;P. Hernández;M. T. Díez;F. Peláez	2005	Studies on Morinia. Recognition of Morinia longiappendiculata sp. nov. as a new endophytic fungus, and a new circumscription of Morinia pestalozzioides	Mycologia	98		616-627				A new coelomycete, Morinia longiappendiculata sp. nov., isolated from living stems of four plant species growing in Central Spain, is described. The distinctive morphological characteristics of this fungus are the production of conidia with long basal and apical appendages on filiform conidiogenous cells, in contrast with the short-appendaged conidia and cylindrical conidiogenic cells of the type species, M. pestalozzioides. Comparative DNA sequence analysis of the ITS region, and fragments of the translation elongation factor 1á, actin, and chitin synthase 1 genes and the study of the HPLC profiles of the M. longiappendiculata and M. pestalozzioides isolates supported the recognition of the new species. Comparison of the ITS rDNA sequences of the Morinia isolates with GenBank sequences indicated that the genus is placed within the Amphisphaeriaceae with the highest similarity with Bartalinia and Truncatella. The Bresadola‚s original definition of M. pestalozzioides is updated by adding information on conidiogenesis and molecular data. A lectotype and epitype are designated for the species. A study of bioactive metabolites revealed that M. pestalozzioides cultures produced moriniafungin, a novel sordarin analog with potent antifungal activity.
S1372	M. Du;C. L. Schardl;E. M. Nuckles;L. J. Vaillancourt	2005	Using Mating-Type Gene Sequences for Improved Phylogenetic Resolution of Colletotrichum Species Complexes	Mycologia	97		641-658				Colletotrichum species are defined primarily on the basis of host preference and morphology of the organism in planta and in culture. However, the genus contains several „species complexes‰ that encompass such a broad range of morphological and pathological variation that the species name is of relatively little use either to the taxonomist or to the plant pathologist. Phylogenetic analyses, primarily based on variable regions of the ribosomal DNA (rDNA) sequences, have indicated that these species complexes comprise a variable number of identifiable monophyletic clades. However, rDNA sequences are often insufficiently diverse to fully resolve such closely related lineages. A group of isolates representing three species complexes (C. graminicola, C. gloeosporioides, and C. acutatum) were analyzed by using the high mobility group (HMG)-encoding sequence of the MAT1-2 mating type sequence, which has been shown in other fungi to be especially suitable for distinguishing relationships among closely related groups. Results were compared with those obtained from analysis of variable regions of the rDNA, as well as from standard morphological classification methods. Results achieved through analysis of MAT1-2 sequences correlated well with those obtained by analysis of rDNA sequences, but provided significantly better resolution among the various lineages. Morphological traits including hyphopodial size, colony appearance, spore size, appressorial shape and size, and host preference were frequently unreliable as indicators of phylogenetic association. Spore shape and hyphopodial shape were more often (but not always) useful for this purpose.
S1594	M. Groenewald;J. Z. Groenewald;U. Braun;P. W. Crous	2005	Host range of Cercospora apii and C. beticola, and description of C. apiicola, a novel species from celery	Mycologia	98		275-285				The genus Cercospora is one of the largest and most heterogeneous genera of hyphomycetes. Cercospora species are distributed worldwide and cause Cercospora leaf spot on most of the major plant families. Numerous species described from diverse hosts and locations are morphologically indistinguishable from C. apii, and are subsequently referred to as C. apii sensu lato. The importance and ecological role that different hosts play in taxon delimitation and recognition within this complex is still unclear. It has been shown that Cercospora leaf spot on celery and sugar beet are caused by C. apii and C. beticola respectively, which are both part of the C. apii complex. During this study we characterized a new Cercospora species, C. apiicola that was isolated from celery in Venezuela, Korea and Greece. The phylogenetic relationship between C. apiicola and other closely related Cercospora species was studied using five different gene areas. These analyses revealed that the C. apiicola isolates cluster together in a well-defined clade. Although C. apii and C. beticola sensu stricto also form well-defined clades, both species are shown to have wider host ranges. Several species of Cercospora previously thought to be part of C. apii based on morphology, are shown to represent distinct species.
S1344	K. Hansen;B. Perry;D. H. Pfister	2005	Phylogenetic origins of two cleistothecial fungi, Orbicula parietina and Lasiobolidium orbiculoides, within the operculate discomycetes	Mycologia							Parsimony, maximum-likelihood and Bayesian analyses of SSU rDNA sequences of representative taxa of Pezizomycetes, Eurotiomycetes, Dothideomycetes, Leotiomycetes and Sordariomycetes all strongly support the cleistothecial fungi O. parietina and L. orbiculoides to be of pezizalean origin. Orbicula parietina and L. orbiculoides are deeply nested within Pyronemataceae (which subsumes the families Ascodesmidaceae, Glaziellaceae and Otideaceae). Close affinities with cleistothecial or highly reduced fungi now placed in the Thelebolales, Eurotiales or Onygenales are rejected. LSU rDNA sequences suggest that Orbicula is nested within the apothecia-forming genus Pseudombrophila (including Nannfeldtiella and Fimaria). Lasiobolidium orbiculoides is closely related and may be congeneric. Ascodesmis and Lasiobolus, which have been suggested as closely related to Orbicula and Lasiobolidium, are identified as a sister lineage to the Pseudombrophila lineage. Cleistothecial forms that have lost the ascus operculum and ability to actively discharge spores have evolved at least once in the Pseudombrophila lineage. Some species of Pseudombrophila produce subglobular ascomata initials that are closed early in development and open only in the mid-mesohymenial phase. We hypothesize that the origin of an ascomata that never opens from an ascoma that opens late in development could involve a simple genetic change. The placement of O. parietina and L. orbiculoides within Pseudombrophila is supported by morphological characters, ecology and temperature optima for fruiting.
S1379	H. M. Hsieh;Y. M. Ju;J. D. Rogers	2005	Molecular phylogeny of Hypoxylon and closely related genera	Mycologia	97		844-865				Phylogenetic relationships were inferred among several xylariaceous genera with Nodulisporium or nodulisporium-like anamorphs based on the analyses of a-tubulin and b-actin sequences. One-hundred-and-nine cultures and three specimens of 83 representatives of these four genera were included in the study. Biscogniauxia taxa formed a well-supported clade that was basal to the other taxa, while taxa of Hypoxylon and Daldinia comprised a large monophyletic group that contained two subclades. The first subclade encompassed Hypoxylon sect. Annulata and is accepted here as the new genus Annulohypoxylon. The second subclade contained taxa of Hypoxylon sect. Hypoxylon and Daldinia. Hypoxylon is restricted to include only those taxa in sect. Hypoxylon. Thirty-three epithets are made in Annulohypoxylon. Hypoxylon cohaerens var. microsporum is raised to the species level and accepted as A. minutellum. Hypoxylon polyporoideum is recognized as distinct from H. crocopeplum. Hypoxylon placentiforme is accepted as Daldinia placentiformis.
S1277	S. Limkaisang;S. Kom-un;E. L. Furtado;K. W. Liew;B. Salleh;Y. Sato;S. Takamatsu	2005	Molecular phylogenetic and morphological analyses of Oidium heveae, a powdery mildew of rubber tree	Mycologia							Powdery mildew of rubber tree caused by Oidium heveae is an important disease of rubber plantations worldwide. Identification and classification of this fungus is still uncertain because there is no authoritative report of its morphology and no record of its teleomorphic stage. In this study, we compared five specimens of the rubber powdery mildew fungus collected in Malaysia, Thailand and Brazil based on morphological and molecular characteristics. Morphological results showed that the fungus on rubber tree belongs to Oidium subgen. Pseudoidium. Nucleotide sequence analysis of the ribosomal DNA internal transcribed spacer (ITS) and the large subunit rRNA gene (28S rDNA) were conducted to determine the relationships of the rubber powdery mildew fungus and to link this anamorphic fungus with its allied teleomorph. The results showed that the rDNA sequences of the two specimens from Malaysia were identical to a specimen from Thailand, while they differed by three bases from the two Brazilian isolates: one nucleotide position in the ITS2 and two positions in the 28S sequences. The ITS sequences of the two Brazilian isolates were identical to sequences of Erysiphe sp. on Quercus phillyraeoides collected in Japan, although the 28S sequences differed at one base from sequences of this fungus. Phylogenetic trees of both rDNA regions constructed by the distance and parsimony methods showed that the rubber powdery mildew fungus grouped with Erysiphe sp. on Quercus phillyraeoides with 100% bootstrap support. Comparisons of the anamorph of two isolates of Erysiphe sp from Q. phillyraeoides with the rubber mildew did not reveal any obvious differences between the two powdery mildew taxa, which suggests that O. heveae may be an anamorph of Erysiphe sp. on Q. phillyraeoides. Cross-inoculation tests are required to substantiate this conclusion.
S1351	J. Luque;S. Martos;A. J. L. Phillips	2005	Botryosphaeria viticola sp. nov. on grapevines: a new species with a Dothiorella anamorph	Mycologia							Botryosphaeria viticola sp. nov., isolated from pruned canes of Vitis vinifera in NE Spain, is described and illustrated. Phylogenetic analysis based on ITS and EF1-alpha sequences and morphological characters of both anamorph and teleomorph confirmed this taxon to be included within the group of Botryosphaeria species with Dothiorella anamorphs. It is most closely related to B. sarmentorum and B. iberica from which it differs in morphological characters of the teleomorph and DNA sequences.
S1355	T. W. Osmundson;C. L. Cripps;G. M. Mueller	2005	Morphological and molecular systematics of Rocky Mountain alpine Laccaria	Mycologia							The alpine zone is comprised of habitats at elevations above treeline, and macromycetes play important ecological roles as decomposers and mycorrhizal symbionts here as elsewhere. Laccaria is an important group of ectomycorrhizal basidiomycetes widely used in experimental and applied research. A systematic study of alpine Laccaria species using morphological, cultural and molecular (ribosomal DNA internal transcribed spacer) data revealed five taxa in the Rocky Mountain alpine zone: L. laccata var. pallidifolia, L. nobilis (the first published report for arctic-alpine habitats), L. pumila, L. montana and L. pseudomontana (a newly described taxon similar to L. montana, with more ellipsoidal, finely echinulate basidiospores). All occur in the Southern Rocky Mountains of Colorado; however, only L. pumila and L. montana were found on the Beartooth Plateau in the Northern Rocky Mountains of Montana and Wyoming. All are associated with dwarf and shrub Salix species, with L. laccata var. pallidifolia also associated with Dryas octopetala and Betula glandulosa. Maximum-parsimony phylogenetic analysis of rDNA-ITS sequences for 27 Laccaria accessions supports the morphological species delineations.
S1260	S. W. Peterson;F. E. Vega;F. Posada;C. Nagai	2005	Penicillium coffeae a new endophytic species isolated from a coffee plant and its phylogenetic relationship to P. fellutanum, P. thiersii and P. brocae based on parsimony analysis of multilocus DNA sequences	Mycologia							Penicillium coffeae is described as a novel endophyte isolated from a Coffeae arabica L. plant in Hawaii. The species is slow growing with short, vesiculate, monoverticillate conidiophores. Phylogenetic analysis using three loci shows that P. coffeae forms a strongly supported clade with P. fellutanum, P. charlesii, P. chermesinum, P. indicum, P. phoeniceum and P. brocae. Phenotypic analysis shows that these species are quite similar but can be distinguished. The EF-1a gene from P. fellutanum, P. charlesii, P. chermesinum and P. indicum lack introns, P. coffeae and P. phoeniceum have a previously unknown intron at codon 20 and P. brocae and P. thiersii isolates have a single intron at codon 26. The most parsimonious interpretation of the strongly supported phylogenetic tree requires the gain of a novel intron at position 20 and loss of intron 26 to arrive at the current distribution of introns in this gene. This is one of only a few examples of intron gain in genes.
S1228	J. Sakayaroj;K. L. Pang;S. Phongpaichit;E. B. G. Jones	2005	A phylogenetic study of the genus Haligena (Halosphaeriales, Ascomycota)	Mycologia							The genus Haligena (Halosphaeriales, Ascomycota), with two accepted species, is frequently encountered in marine habitats, especially on wood in temperate regions. Phylogenetic analyses of Haligena elaterophora (type species) and H. salina were undertaken, using partial large subunit ribosomal DNA sequences, to determine their relationships with other closely related genera in the order. The genus was shown to be polyphyletic within the Halosphaeriales, with the type species forming a basal clade to the order. Haligena salina constituted a sister group with Neptunella longirostris. Haligena elaterophora and H. salina differ significantly in the nature of their ascospore appendages: wider, more sticky and strap-like in H. elaterophora , and spoon-shaped at the point of attachment, while in H. salina they are longer and narrower, finely drawn out filaments. A new genus, Morakotiella, is introduced to accommodate H. salina.
S1236	H. J. Schroers;M. M. Geldenhuis;M. J. Wingfield;M. H. Schoeman;B. D. Wingfield	2005	Classification of the guava wilt fungus Myxosporium psidii, the palm pathogen Gliocladium vermoesenii and the persimmon wilt fungus Acremonium diospyri in Nalanthamala	Mycologia							Psidium guajava wilt is known from South Africa, Malaysia and Taiwan. The fungus causing this disease, Myxosporium psidii, forms dry chains of conidia on surfaces of pseudoparenchymatous sporodochia, which develop in blisters on bark. Similar sporodochia are characteristic of Nalanthamala madreeya, the type species of Nalanthamala. Nalanthamala, therefore, is the appropriate anamorph genus for Myxosporium psidii, while Myxosporium is a nomen nudum (based on M. croceum). For M. psidii the combination Nalanthamala psidii is proposed. Nalanthamala psidii, the palm pathogen Gliocladium (Penicillium) vermoesenii, another undescribed anamorphic species from palm, two species of Rubrinectria and the persimmon pathogen Acremonium diospyri are monophyletic and belong to the Nectriaceae (Hypocreales) based on partial nuclear large subunit ribosomal DNA (LSU rDNA) analyses. Rubrinectria, therefore, is the teleomorph of Nalanthamala, in which the anamorphs are classified as N. vermoesenii, N. diospyri or Nalanthamala sp. Nalanthamala squamicola, the only other Nalanthamala species, has affinities with the Bionectriaceae and is excluded from this group. Rubrinectria/Nalanthamala species form dimorphic conidiophores and conidia in culture. Fusiform, cylindrical, or allantoid conidia arise in colorless liquid heads on acremonium-like conidiophores; ovoidal conidia with somewhat truncated ends arise in long, persistent, dry chains on penicillate conidiophores. No penicillate but irregularly branched conidiophores were observed in N. diospyri. Conidia of N. psidii that are held in chains are shorter than those of N. madreeya, of which no living material is available. Nalanthamala psidii and N. diospyri are pathogenic specifically to their hosts. They form pale yellow to pale orange or brownish orange colonies, respectively, and more or less white conidial masses. Most strains of Rubrinectria sp., Nalanthamala sp. and N. vermoesenii originate from palm hosts, form mostly greenish or olive-brown colonies and white-to-salmon conidial masses. They form a monophyletic clade to which Nalanthamala psidii and N. diospyri are related based on analyses of the internal transcribed spacer regions and 5.8S rDNA (ITS rDNA), LSU rDNA, and partial beta-tubulin gene. Few polymorphic sites in the ITS rDNA and beta-tubulin gene indicate that Nalanthamala psidii comprises two lineages, one of which has been detected only in South Africa.
S1363	R. G. Thorn;J. M. Moncalvo;S. A. Redhead;D. J. Lodge;M. P. Martin	2005	A new poroid species of Resupinatus from Puerto Rico, with a reassessment of the cyphelloid genus Stigmatolemma	Mycologia							A fungus with gelatinous poroid fruiting bodies was found in Puerto Rico and determined by macro- and micromorphology to be most similar to members of the lamellate agaric genus Resupinatus. This species is described as a new species, Resupinatus porosus. Phylogenetic analyses of ribosomal DNA sequences support the inclusion of this fungus in the clade containing Resupinatus, and indicate that this monophyletic group also includes members of Asterotus and the cyphelloid genus Stigmatolemma. Resupinatus porosus is another example of tropical poroid representatives of lamellate agaric genera. Resupinatus is emended to include species with poroid (R. porosus) or merulioid (R. merulioides) hymenophore as well as those with laterally stipitate (Asterotus) and cyphelloid (Stigmatolemma) fruiting bodies. Seven new combinations in Resupinatus are proposed to accommodate well-known species of Stigmatolemma.
S1270	A. W. Wilson;D. E. Desjardin	2005	Phylogenetic relationships between Gymnopus, Marasmius, Marasmiellus and related fungi (Basidiomycetes, euagarics clade)	Mycologia							Three distinct lineages of gymnopoid and marasmioid fungi are recognized in parsimony and Bayesian analyses of nLSU rDNA sequences. One lineage contains the genera Lentinula, Rhodocollybia, Tetrapyrgos, a resurrected and redefined Mycetinis, and two unresolved clades designated /marasmiellus and /gymnopus. /marasmiellus includes the type species of Marasmiellus and is dominated by members of Gymnopus sect. Vestipedes. /gymnopus includes the type species of Gymnopus, Micromphale and Setulipes, and members of Gymnopus sect. Levipedes. A second lineage includes the genera Marasmius s.s., Crinipellis and Chaetocalathus (separate study) and represents a redefined /marasmiaceae. A third lineage includes the genera Cylindrobasidium, Flammulina, Gloiocephala, Physalacria, Strobilurus, Xerula and Marasmius sect. Epiphylli, and represents /physalacriaceae. One new combination in Rhodocollybia and four new combinations in Mycetinis are proposed. A discussion of the taxonomic implications resulting from the phylogenetic reconstruction is presented.
S1551	N. Yanagida;T. Irie;E. Tanaka;C. Teramoto;K. Kuwabara;A. Tajimi	2005	New choke diseases and their molecular phylogenetic analysis in Agropyron ciliare var. minus and Agropyron tsukushiense var. transiens	Mycologia	97		1287-1291				Choke diseases were surveyed in two closely related grass species, Agropyron ciliare var. minus (Aokamojigusa) and Agropyron tsukushiense var. transiens (Kamojigusa) in Shiga Prefecture, Japan, whereas the ascospore was not observed in either case. Conidiostromata on A. ciliare var. minus enclosed and sterilized young inflorescens, such as the typical choke symptom by Epichloë typhina. On the other hand, conidiostromata on A. tsukusiense var. transiens thinly covered mature spike with white epiphyllous hyphae, such as a conidiostroma of Ephelis spp. The fungal isolates produced typical Neotyphodium-type conidia. Molecular phylogenetic analyses using the beta-tubulin gene (tubB) indicated that the two Agropyron species are infected with the species grouping into a novel single clade among Epichloë species and they are closely related to a haploid of hybrid Neotyphodium species. The host plant features may be a cause for the different type of conidiostromata between in A. ciliare var. minus and in A. tsukushiense var. transiens.
S1503	Y. C. Dai;Z. Wang;M. Binder;D. S. Hibbett	2006	Phylogeny and a new species of Sparassis (Polyporales, Basidiomycota): evidence from mitochondrial atp6, nuclear rDNA and rpb2 genes	Mycologia							Three nuclear genes, lsu-rDNA (encoding nuclear large subunit rDNA), ITS (encoding the rDNA internal transcribed spacers and 5.8S rDNA), and rpb2 (encoding the second largest subunit of RNA polymerase II), and the mitochondrial gene atp6 (encoding the sixth subunit of ATP synthase), were sequenced from all recognized Sparassis lineages. Sparassis latifolia sp. nov. from boreal coniferous forests in China is described based on morphological, ecological, geographical, and molecular data. The nuclear gene phylogeny strongly supported groups corresponding to morphological differences, geographic distribution and host shifts among species that produce clamp connections, such as S. crispa from Europe, S. radicata from western North America, and S. latifolia from Asia. The atp6 phylogeny, however, showed no divergence among these three species. For clampless Sparassis species, such as S. spathulata from eastern North America, S. brevipes and a new species from Europe, the atp6 phylogeny was congruent with the nuclear gene phylogeny. Sparassis cystidiosa is basal in the nuclear tree but sister to S. brevipes ˆ S. spathulata clade in the ATP6 tree. The differences between the phylogenetic inferences from the atp6 gene and those from nuclear genes within Sparassis species are discussed.
S1661	B. T. M. Dentinger;D. J. McLaughlin	2006	Reconstructing the Clavariaceae using nuclear large subunit rDNA sequences and a new genus segregated from Clavaria	Mycologia	98	5	746-762				Fungi that produce clavarioid fruitbodies have evolved independently many times in the Basidiomycota. The evolutionary significance of this morphology is difficult to interpret because the phylogenetic positions of many clavarioid fungi are still unknown. In this study, we examined the phylogenetic diversity of the Clavariaceae sensu lato among Homobasidiomycetidae by adding partial nuclear large subunit ribosomal DNA sequences from clavarioid and corticioid fungi to a large euagaric dataset, and analyzing them both together and separately. Our results confirm that the clavarioid morphology has evolved multiple times within the euagarics, and that these may be reduced fruitbody types that have been repeatedly derived from agaricoid or corticioid ancestors. In some cases it was difficult to determine phylogenetic affinities of certain taxa due to ambiguous or dubious identifications of sequences downloaded from GenBank, while in other cases our results were more clear. We propose the new genus Alloclavaria to accommodate Clavaria purpurea, which is not related to Clavaria, but is derived within the hymenochaetoid clade. The Clavariaceae needs redefinition to reflect a monophyletic group and the limits of Clavaria, Clavulinopsis, and Ramariopsis should be reconsidered when additional data are available.
S1489	M. Gryzenhout;H. Myburg;C. A. Rodas;B. D. Wingfield;M. J. Wingfield	2006	Aurapex penicillata gen. sp. nov. from native Miconia theaezans and Tibouchina spp. in Colombia	Mycologia	98		105-115				Conidiomata of a fungus resembling Chrysoporthe cubensis, a serious canker pathogen of Eucalyptus spp. (Myrtaceae, Myrtales) in tropical and subtropical parts of the world, was found on Eucalyptus grandis in Colombia. Fruiting structures of the fungus could be distinguished from those of C. cubensis by their distinctly orange conidiomatal necks. This fungus was also found on several plant species native to Colombia including Tibouchina urvilleana, T. lepidota and Miconia theaezans (Melastomataceae, Myrtales). Morphological comparisons as well as those based on sequences of the ITS1/ITS2 region of the ribosomal DNA repeat and the Beta-tubulin gene, were used to characterize this fungus. Its pathogenicity was also assessed on various plants from which it has been collected, either in field or greenhouse trials. Phylogenetic analyses showed that isolates reside in a clade distinct from the four clades accommodating Chrysoporthe, Cryphonectria, Endothia and Rostraureum. Members of this clade are distinguished by the presence of orange conidiomatal necks with black bases, and a unique internal stromatal structure. No teleomorph has been found for this fungus, for which we have provided the name Aurapex penicillata gen. sp. nov. A. penicillata produced only small lesions after inoculation on young T. urvilleana, M. theaezans and E. grandis trees, and appears not to be a serious pathogen.
S1487	M. Gryzenhout;H. Myburg;B. D. Wingfield;M. J. Wingfield	2006	Cryphonectriaceae (Diaporthales), a new family including Cryphonectria, Endothia, Chrysoporthe and allied genera	Mycologia	98		239-249				Recent phylogenetic studies on the members of the Diaporthales have shown that the order includes a number of distinct phylogenetic groups. These groups represent the Gnomoniaceae, Melanconidaceae, Valsaceae, Diaporthaceae and Togniniaceae. New groups representing undescribed families have also emerged and they have been referred to as the Schizoparme, Cryphonectria-Endothia and Harknessia complexes. In this study, we define the new family Cryphonectriaceae (Diaporthales) to accommodate genera in the Cryphonectria-Endothia complex. These genera can be distinguished from those in other families or undescribed groups of the Diaporthales, by the formation of orange stromatic tissue at some stage of their life cycle, and a purple color reaction in KOH and a yellow reaction in lactic acid associated with pigments in the stromatic tissue or in culture.
S1545	K. Hansen;D. H. Pfister	2006	Systematics of the Pezizomycetes - the operculate discomycetes	Mycologia							The Pezizomycetes (order Pezizales) are an early diverging lineage within the Pezizomycotina. A shared derived character, the operculate ascus, supports the Pezizales as monophyletic, although functional opercula have been lost in certain taxa. Phylogenetic relationships within Pezizales were studied using Parsimony and Bayesian analyses of partial SSU and LSU rDNA sequences from 100 taxa representing 82 genera, and 13 of the 15 families currently recognized. Three primary lineages are identified that more or less corresponds to the A, B and C lineages resolved in previous analyses using SSU rDNA: A) Ascobolaceae and Pezizaceae, B) Discinaceae-Morchellaceae and Helvellaceae-Tuberaceae, C) Ascodesmidaceae, Glaziellaceae, Pyronemataceae, Sarcoscyphaceae and Sarcosomataceae. In contrast, the monotypic Rhizinaceae and Caloscyphaceae are resolved as two independent lineages. Bayesian analyses support a relationship between Rhizina and two species of Psilopezia (Pyronemataceae). Only lineage C is highly supported. The B and C lineages form a strongly supported monophyletic group. None of these lineages correspond to earlier proposed suborders. The lineages A and B are supported by certain morphological features, e.g. ascus bluing reaction in iodine, cytology of spores and paraphyses, septal pore structures, and excipulum structure; these characters have been subject to homoplasy. Lineage C is the largest and most heterogeneous, and no unifying morphological features support its recognition. The Pyronemataceae, in which almost half of the species in the order are found, are not monophyletic because the Ascodesmidaceae and Glaziellaceae are nested within it. The relationships among all families in the C lineage remain uncertain. The origin of various forms of ascomata, including hypogeous (truffles and truffle-like forms), epigeous cleistothecia, simple reduced apothecia and highly elaborate, stipitate forms (helvelloid and morchelloid), are discussed.
S1361	W. M. Jaklitsch;M. Komon;C. P. Kubicek;I. S. Druzhinina	2006	Hypocrea voglmayrii sp. nov. from the Austrian Alps represents a new phylogenetic clade in Hypocrea/Trichoderma	Mycologia							The holomorph of the new species Hypocrea voglmayri (Hypocreales, Ascomycota, Fungi) is described by a concerted approach, using morphology of the teleomorph, morphology of the anamorph, culture studies, and phylogenetic analyses of ITS1 and 2, tef1, ech42 and rpb2 gene sequences. Unlike most other species of Hypocrea, the teleomorph of H. voglmayri occurs on dry standing trunks and exhibits well-defined black ostioles. Although exclusively collected at high altitudes, cultures of this species grow at 35°C. They develop pale yellowish to greenish conidia, a yellowish pigment, and a coconut-like odor on CMD. Phylogenetically, H. voglmayri forms a distinct, lone branch in the vicinity of section Trichoderma and the H. pachybasioides clade, but does not associate with any of these clades in different gene trees.
S1477	W. M. Jaklitsch;M. Komon;C. P. Kubicek;I. S. Druzhinina	2006	Hypocrea crystalligena sp. nov., a common European species with a white-spored Trichoderma anamorph	Mycologia							The new species <i>Hypocrea crystalligena</i> (Hypocreales, Ascomycota, Fungi) is described as a holomorph and characterized based on an integrated phenetic and molecular approach, using teleomorph and anamorph morphologies, culture studies, and analyses of phylogenetic markers such as internal transcribed spacer 1 and 2 (ITS1 and 2), two last introns of the translation elongation factor 1-alpha encoding gene (<i>tef1</i>), and a portion of the <i>rpb2</i> gene, encoding the second largest RNA polymerase subunit. Stromata of <i>H. crystalligena</i> show similarities with those of species from section <i>Trichoderma</i>, but differ in several respects, including color, presence of white crystals on the surface, and small ascospores. Colonies on CMD appear distinct, form colorless to white crystals upon isolation, a yellowish to brown pigment, and a white-spored anamorph exhibiting verticillium-like to gliocladium-like structural elements. ITS1 and 2 sequences exhibit all genus-specific features but also contain several unique hallmarks permitting development of a species-diagnostic barcode. Based on the analyses of partial <i>rpb2</i> and <i>tef1</i> sequences, <i>H. crystalligena</i> constitutes a separate evolutionary lineage with <i>H. megalocitrina</i> and <i>H. psychrophila</i> as next neighbors. All these species form one phylogenetic clade with the <i>H. pulvinata - H. citrina</i> node.
S1704	Y. M. Ju;H. M. Hsieh;M. C. Ho;D. H. Szu;M. J. Fang	2006	Theissenia rogersii sp. nov. and phylogenetic position of Theissenia	Mycologia							Theissenia rogersii deviates from the other Theissenia species primarily in having large ascospores with a thick wall layer and a unique configuration of two different stromatal tissue types. The carbonaceous tissue forms palisades on and beneath perithecial layer as well as encasing individual perithecia, whereas the fibrous tissue fills the spaces between stakes of the palisades as well as between encased perithecia. Phylogenetic analyses based on DNA sequences of beta-tubulin and alpha-actin genes placed Theissenia among the genera with bipartite stromata in the subfamily Hypoxyloideae.
S1501	R. Kodsueb;R. Jeewon;D. Vijaykrishna;A. Aptroot;E. H. C. McKenzie;S. Lumyong;K. D. Hyde	2006	The family Pleosporaceae: intergeneric relationships and phylogenetic perspectives based on sequence analyses of partial 28S rDNA	Mycologia							The Pleosporaceae is an important loculoascomycete family. There has however, been disagreement regarding the taxonomic placement of many genera within this family. This study investigates phylogenetic relationships among the genera Cochliobolus, Kirschsteiniothelia, Leptosphaerulina, Macroventuria, Pleospora, Pyrenophora, and Wettsteinina. Partial 28S rDNA sequences from taxa within these genera were analysed using maximum parsimony, likelihood and bayesian methods. Cochliobolus can broadly be segregated into two groups as previously proposed. Pleospora is polyphyletic in its current sense. Taxa with Stemphylium anamorphs are closely related to Cochliobolus and fit within the Pleosporaceae, whereas the affinities of Pleospora herbarum and P. ambigua are still obscure. Pyrenophora constitute a monophyletic group within the Pleosporaceae whereas Leptosphaerulina and Macroventuria appear to share phylogenetic affinities to the Leptosphaeriaceae and Phaeosphaeriaceae. Phylogenies indicate that Wettsteinina should be excluded from the Pleosporaceae. Similar findings are reported for Kirschsteiniothelia which is probably polyphyletic. Anamorphic characters appear to be significant (especially in Cochliobolus) while ascospore morphologies, such as shape and color and substrate occurrence are poor predictors of phylogenetic relationships among these loculoascomycetes.
S1713	S. L. Miller;E. Larsson;K. H. Larsson;A. Verbeken;J. Nuytinck	2006	Perspectives in the new Russulales	Mycologia	98		960-970				Abstract: The Russulales is one of twelve major lineages recently elucidated by molecular sequence data in the homobasidiomycetes. The order is morphologically most diverse, containing a remarkable variety of sporophore forms including resupinate, discoid, effused-reflexed, clavarioid, pileate, or gasteroid and hymenophore configurations from smooth, poroid, hydnoid, lamellate, to labyrinthoid. Functionally these fungi are primarily saprotrophes but others are ectomycorrhizal, root parasites, and insect symbionts. A phylogenetic analysis of the nuclear 5.8S, ITS2 and large-subunit rDNA genes comprises the best information to date on relationships of taxa within the Russulales. Two large sister groups encompassing eleven to thirteen major clades have been recovered within the Russulales. Based on molecular and morphological data, 12 families and approximately 80 genera have been identified, although placement of many taxa has not yet been determined. The two clades containing ectomycorrhizal taxa, corresponding to the Russulaceae and the Albatrellaceae, represent the greatest diversity of sporophore morphologies. The primarily pileate lamellate family Russulaceae is nested with resupinate species and also contains pileate sequestrate, annulate and pleurotoid forms. Similarly, Albatrellaceae contains resupinate poroid, pileate poroid and pileate labyrinthoid sporophores. Presence of gloeoplerous hyphae containing fluid that stains black in sulfoaldehyde compounds is a synapomorphy for the Russulales. Amyloid reactions in spore or hyphal walls that occur frequently throughout the Russulales are often perceived as an obvious synapomorphy, but is inconsistent. Approaches including sequencing functional genes, analysis of gene expression and biochemical analysis across the entire order are needed.
S1725	Y. Ota;S. Tokuda;P. K. Buchanan;T. Hattori	2006	Phylogenetic relationships of Japanese species of Heterobasidion - H. annosum sensu lato and an undetermined Heterobasidion sp	Mycologia	98		717-725				The phylogenetic relationships of two Japanese Heterobasidion species, H. annosum sensu lato and an undetermined species, were revealed based on partial nucleotide sequences of four gene loci: glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase (gpd), heat shock protein 80-1 (hsp) and elongation factor 1-∞¿ (ef). The tree based on combined data of gpd, ef and hsp showed that Japanese H. annosum s. l. was close to the European S-group, forming subclade. The results of this study also provided strong support for the recognition of the undetermined Heterobasidion sp. as a distinct phylogenetic species.
S1614	D. Redecker;P. Raab	2006	Phylogeny of the Glomeromycota (arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi): recent developments and new gene markers	Mycologia							The fungal symbionts of arbuscular mycorrhiza form a monophyletic group in the True Fungi, the phylum Glomeromycota. Less than 200 described species are currently included in this group. The only member of this clade known to form a different type of symbiosis is Geosiphon pyriformis, which associates with cyanobacteria. As none of these fungi has been cultivated without their plant hosts or cyanobacterial partners, progress in obtaining multi-gene phylogenies has been slow and the nuclear-encoded ribosomal RNA genes have remained the only widely accessible molecular markers. rDNA phylogenies have revealed considerable polyphyly of some glomeromycotan genera which has been used to reassess taxonomic concepts. Environmental studies utilizing phylogenetic methods for molecular identification have recovered an amazing diversity of unknown phylotypes, suggesting that there is considerable cryptic species diversity. Protein gene sequences that have become available recently have challenged the rDNA-supported sister group relationship of the Glomeromycota with Asco/Basidomycota. However, the number of taxa analyzed with these new markers is still too small to provide a comprehensive picture of intra-phylum relationships. We use nuclear-encoded rDNA and rpb1 protein gene sequences to reassess the phylogeny of the Glomeromycota and discuss possible implications.
S1524	S. Sokolski;B. Laitung;Y. Piché;J. A. Bérubé	2006	Streams in Quebec boreal and mixedwood forests reveal a new aquatic hyphomycete species: Dwayaangam colodena sp. nov	Mycologia							Foam from eight streams in boreal and mixedwood forests in Québec were sampled in early and late fall of 2002 to evaluate the biodiversity of their aquatic hyphomycete communities. Two regions were studied: from 53°N to 54°N, and 46°N to 49°N. A total of 54 species were identified. Twenty-eight taxa were found only in the northern region, and five were unique to the southern region. A new aquatic hyphomycete, Dwayaangam colodena sp. nov., was found mostly in northern streams. It is described along with its taxonomic position.
S1966	J. W. Spatafora;D. Johnson;G. H. Sung;K. Hosaka;B. O'Rourke;M. Serdani;R. Spotts;F. Lutzoni;V. Hofstetter;E. Fraker;C. Gueidan;J. Miadlikowska;V. Reeb;T. Lumbsch;R. Lücking;I. Schmitt;A. Aptroot;C. Roux;A. Miller;D. Geiser;G. Hestmark;A. E. Arnold;B. Büdel;A. Rauhut;D. Hewitt;W. A. Untereiner;M. S. Cole;C. Scheidegger;M. Schultz;H. Sipman;C. L. Schoch	2006	A five-gene phylogenetic analysis of the Pezizomycotina	Mycologia	98		1018-1028				The Pezizomycotina is the largest subphylum of the Ascomycota and includes the vast majority of filamentous, ascoma-producing species. Here we report the results from parsimony and Bayesian phylogenetic analyses of five nuclear loci (SSU rDNA, LSU rDNA, RPB1, RPB2, and EF 1-&#61537;) from 192 taxa. Nine of the ten classes currently recognized in the classification of the Outline of the Ascomycota (Eriksson 2005) were represented in the sampling. These data strongly supported the monophyly of the Pezizomycotina, and the Arthoniomycetes, Eurotiomycetes, Lecanoromycetes, Orbiliomycetes, and Sordariomycetes. The Pezizomycetes were resolved as monophyletic but not strongly supported by the data. The Leotiomycetes and the Dothideomycetes were not resolved as monophyletic; Geoglossum and Trichoglossum were excluded from the Leotiomycetes and the Dothideomycetes was paraphyletic based on the placement of the Arthoniomycetes. The two most basal classes of the Pezizomycotina were the Orbiliomycetes and Pezizomycetes, both of which comprise species that produce apothecial ascomata. The seven remaining classes formed a monophyletic group that corresponds to Leotiomyceta sensu Eriksson et al. Within the Leotiomyceta, the supraclass clades of (Leotiomycetes s. s., Sordariomycetes) and (Arthoniomycetes, Dothideomycetes) were well supported. These analyses supported the apothecium as the ancestral ascomal morphology of the Pezizomycotina with the perithecium restricted to the Sordariomycetes, the ascostroma restricted to the Eurotiomycetes and Dothideomycetes, and the cleistothecium broadly distributed in Eurotiomycetes, Sordariomycetes and Leotiomycetes. Ordinal membership of the classes, taxonomic revisions, and evolution of ascus morphology and major ecologies are discussed.
S1424	T. Sutheera;R. Jeewon;V. Dhanasekaran;S. Lumyong;E. H. C. McKenzie;K. D. Hyde	2006	Intergeneric relationships within Magnaporthaceae and its phylogenetic placement based on rDNA sequence analyses	Mycologia							The phylogeny of the family Magnaporthaceae and allied genera were investigated using individual and combined analyses of 18S and 28S nuclear ribosomal DNA (rDNA) gene fragments. DNA from 29 taxa representing 6 genera from Magnaporthaceae were sequenced and analyzed phylogenetically based on bayesian, likelihood and parsimony methods. Magnaporthaceae, encompassing genera such as Buergenerula, Gaeumannomyces, Magnaporthe, Mycoleptodiscus, Ophioceras, Pseudohalonectria and Pyricularia constitute a strongly supported monophyletic clade. Phylogenies indicate that Magnaporthaceae bears close phylogenetic affinities to the order Diaporthales and Ophiostomatales. However, there appears to be sufficient evidence to establish a new order to accommodate the Magnaporthaceae. Results also indicate that Ophioceras is probably monophyletic with the exception of O. tenuisporum. Magnaporthe salvinii is more closely related to Gaeumannomyces than M. grisea, which clusters with Pyricularia. The placement of Mycoleptodiscus coloratus and Ceratosphaeria lampadophora within the Magnaporthaceae is confirmed. Molecular data also provided further evidence to support the association of several anamorphic genera with the ascomycetous Magnaporthaceae. The phylogenetic significance of several morphologies currently used in the classification of members among Magnaporthaceae is discussed.
S1546	Z. Wang;P. R. Johnston;S. Takamatsu;J. W. Spatafora;D. S. Hibbett	2006	Towards a phylogenetic classification of the Leotiomycetes based on rDNA data	Mycologia							Phylogenetic relationships of one of the largest non-lichen forming ascomycetous groups, the Leotiomycetes, were inferred from genes encoding 3 rDNA regions (SSU+LSU+5.8S rDNA). A data set was prepared using rDNA sequences data from 108 isolates, among which 85 taxa representing 4 orders and 16 families in the Leotiomycetes were sampled. Equally weighted parsimony and Bayesian analyses were performed. Bootstrap proportion and Bayesian posterior probability under the GTR+?+I model were estimated along the branches. Based on our results, the Leotiomycetes is relatively well defined as a class, and it includes the Cyttariales, Erysiphales, Helotiales, Rhytismatales, and two families of uncertain position, Myxotrichaceae, and Pseudeurotiaceae. The placements of the Thelebolales and Ascocorticiaceae are not examined and are accepted as tentative in the Leotiomycetes. Our results agree with previous studies to remove the Geoglossaceae, including Geoglossum, Trichoglossum and Sarcoleotia, from the Leotiomycetes. Sequence data of rDNA regions are not adequate to resolve the relationships among major groups of the Leotiomycetes. Positions of the Erysiphales and Rhytismatales in the Leotiomycetes are confirmed. The Helotiales and Myxotrichaceae are paraphyletic. Close relationships among the Hemiphacidiaceae, Rutstroemiaceae and Sclerotiniaceae, among Loramycetaceae, the Northern Hemisphere Vibrisseaceae, the Dark Septate Endophyte fungus Phialocephala fortinii and Mollisia cinerea, and between species of Bulgaria and Phadidiopycnis, are strongly supported.
S1646	S. Yang;D. H. Pfister	2006	Monotropa uniflora plants of eastern Massachusetts form mycorrhizae with a diversity of russulacean fungi	Mycologia							Plant species in the subfamily Monotropoideae are mycoheterotrophs; they obtain fixed carbon from photosynthetic plants via a shared mycorrhizal network. Previous findings show mycoheterotrophic plants exhibit a high level of specificity to their mycorrhizal fungi. In this study, we explore the association of mycorrhizal fungi and Monotropa uniflora (Monotropoideae: Ericaceae) in eastern North America. We collected M. uniflora roots and nearby basidiomycete sporocarps from four sites within a 100 km2 area in eastern Massachusetts. We analyzed DNA sequences of the internal transcribed spacer region (ITS) from the fungal nuclear ribosomal gene to assess the genetic diversity of fungi associating with M. uniflora roots. In this analysis we included 20 ITS sequences from Russula sporocarps collected nearby, 44 sequences of Russula or Lactarius species from GenBank, and 12 GenBank sequences of fungi isolated from M. uniflora roots in previous studies. We found that all 56 sampled M. uniflora mycorrhizal fungi were members of the Russulaceae, confirming previous research. The analysis showed that most of the diversity of mycorrhizal fungi spreads across the genus Russula. ITS sequences of the mycorrhizal fungi consisted of 20 different phylotypes: 18 of the genus Russula and 2 of Lactarius, based on GenBank searches. Of the sampled plants, 57% associated with only 3 of the 20 mycorrhizal fungi detected in roots, and of the 25 sporocarp phylotypes collected, 3 were associated with M. uniflora. Furthermore, the results indicate that the number of different fungal phylotypes associating with M. uniflora of eastern North America is higher than that of western North America, but patterns of fungal species abundance may be similar between mycorrhizae from the two locations.
S1332	S. Massoumi Alamouti;J. J. Kim;C. Breuil	2006	A new Leptographium species associated with the northern spruce engraver, Ips perturbatus, in western Canada	Mycologia	98	1	149-160	10.3852/mycologia.98.1.149			During a survey of the ophiostomatoid fungi associated with the spruce-infesting bark beetles of the genus Ips De Geer an undescribed Leptographium species was isolated from the Ips perturbatus beetles collected from felled spruce trees and logs in northern British Columbia and the Yukon Territory. This species was characterized based on its morphology, nuclear rDNA and partial ?-tubulin gene sequences. The fungus grew optimally at 25 °C on 2% malt extract agar and showed a high level of tolerance to cycloheximide. The Leptographium sp. has long, grouped conidiophores and is morphologically most similar to L. abietinum while is genetically close to O. abiocarpum. Comparison of DNA sequence data as well as morphological and physiological characteristics, confirmed that this fungus represents a new species described here as L. fruticetum.
S1869	A. Abe;Y. Oda;K. Asano;T. Sone	2007	Rhizopus delemar is the Proper Name for Rhizopus oryzae Fumaric-Malic Acid Producers	Mycologia	99	5	714-722	10.3852/mycologia.99.5.714 			The zygomycete Rhizopus oryzae is currently identified by sporangiophore morphology and the growth temperature, but heterogeneity of the species has been reported. We examined the suitability of organic acid production as an effective taxonomic character for reclassification of the species. Strains were divided into two groups, LA (lactic acid producer) and FMA (fumaric-malic acid producers) according to organic acid production. These grouping were confirmed as phylogenetically distinct, because analyses of rDNA ITS, lactate dehydrogenase B, actin, translation elongation factor-1∞¿, and genome-wide AFLP resolved the same two exclusive clusters, corresponding with the organic acid grouping. Reclassification of strains in the FMA group as R. delemar was proposed.
S1787	J. C. Batzer;M. M. D. Arias;T. C. Harrington;M. L. Gleason;P. W. Crous	2007	Four species of Zygophiala (Schizothyriaceae, Capnodiales) are associated with the sooty blotch and flyspeck complex on apple	Mycologia							Sooty blotch and flyspeck (SBFS) are late-season blemishes of apple and pear fruit that cosmetically damage the cuticle, resulting in produce that is unacceptable to consumers. Previous studies reported that a single, wide-host-range species, Schizothyrium pomi (presumed anamorph: Zygophiala jamaicensis), caused flyspeck on apple. In the present study we compared morphology and DNA phylogeny (ITS, LSU) of 139 fungal strains isolated from flyspeck signs from 39 apple orchards in 14 Midwestern and eastern states (USA). Parsimony analysis, supported by cultural characteristics and morphology in vitro, provided support to delimit the flyspeck isolates into four species of Zygophiala, two of which are known to be sexual. Three of these species are described as new. Based on DNA phylogeny, species of Schizothyrium were shown to cluster with members of the genus Mycosphaerella in the Capnodiales, having similar asci and ascospores but morphologically distinct ascomata. These data question the value of ascomatal morphology at the ordinal level, although it appears to still be relevant at the family level, delimiting the thyrothecial Schizothyriaceae from other families in the Capnodiales.
S1837	U. Braun;A. Shi;M. Mmbaga;S. Takamatsu;R. Divarangkoon;P. Chen	2007	Erysiphe abbreviata on cherry bark oak — morphology, phylogeny and taxonomy	Mycologia							Powdery mildew on cherry bark oak (Quercus falcate var. pagodifolia) recently collected in Tennessee, USA, proved to belong to Erysiphe abbreviata, a species confined to North America. The diagnostically important anamorph of this species is described here in detail for the first time. Sequence analyses of the rDNA ITS region and D1/D2 domains of the 28S rDNA were carried out in this study to obtain first phylogenetic data for and taxonomic conclusions for this species. The structure of the anamorph (Oidium subgen. Pseudoidium) and the molecular data support the placement of this species in Erysiphe emend. (incl. Microsphaera) as a separate species.
S1927	A. Chandra;D. R. Huff	2007	Salmacisia, a new genus of Tilletiales: reclassification of Tilletia buchlo√´ana causing induced hermaphroditism in buffalograss	Mycologia							For 118 yrs, the fungal parasite Tilletia buchloëana 1 has been known to induce female sex organs (pistils) in male plants of buffalograss, making them hermaphrodite. Here we report the life cycle characteristics and phylogeny for T. buchloëana based on morphology and large subunit region of nuclear ribosomal RNA gene (nLSU-rDNA) in order to accurately place pistil smut within order Tilletiales. We found that T. buchloëana induces hermaphroditism in not only male sex forms of buffalograss by inducing the development of otherwise vestigial pistils, but also in female sex forms by inducing hypertrophy of otherwise vestigial stamens (male sex organs). The fungus also induces the development of additional pistillate flowers in both infected male and female plants. Due to its pistil inducing effects, we refer to T. buchloëana as pistil smut. Pistil smut exhibits a combination of morphological and life cycle characteristics that are unique among species of order Tilletiales. Phylogenetic analyses of nLSU-rDNA sequences using maximum parsimony, maximum likelihood and genetic distance-based methods show that pistil smut exhibits an elevated rate of nucleotide substitution and is as, or more, distant from Tilletia species than the basal group Erratomyces patelli. As such, pistil smut occupies a phylogenetic position outside the current taxonomic circumscription of genus Tilletia. Therefore, a new Latin binomial combination Salmacisia buchloëana is proposed as a sister taxon to Tilletia in order to accurately describe the phylogenetic position of pistil smut.
S1909	U. Damm;P. W. Crous;P. H. Fourie	2007	Botryosphaeriaceae as potential pathogens of Prunus species in South Africa, with descriptions of Diplodia africana and Lasiodiplodia plurivora spp. nov	Mycologia	99	5	664-680				Botryosphaeriaceae are common dieback and canker pathogens of woody host plants, including stone fruit trees. In the present study, the diversity of members of the Botryosphaeriaceae isolated from symptomatic wood of Prunus species (plum, peach, nectarine and apricot) was determined in different stone fruit growing areas in South Africa. Morphological and cultural characteristics as well as DNA sequence data (5.8S rDNA, ITS-1, ITS-2 and EF-1?) were used to identify known, and describe novel members of Botryosphaeriaceae. From the total number of wood samples collected (258), 67 isolates of Botryosphaeriaceae were obtained, from which eight species were identified. All species were associated with wood necrosis. Diplodia seriata (= „Botryosphaeria‰ obtusa) was dominant, and present on all four Prunus species sampled, followed by Neofusicoccum vitifusiforme and N. australe. First reports from Prunus spp. include N. vitifusiforme, Dothiorella viticola and Diplodia pinea. This is also the first report of D. mutila from South Africa. Two species are newly described, namely Lasiodiplodia plurivora sp. nov. from P. salicina, and Diplodia africana sp. nov. from P. persica. All species, except Dothiorella viticola, caused lesions on green nectarine and/or plum shoots in a detached shoot pathogenicity assay.
S1750	P. B. Matheny;E. C. Vellinga;N. L. Bougher;O. Ceska;P. A. Moreau;M. A. Neves;J. F. Ammirati	2007	Taxonomy of displaced species of Tubaria	Mycologia							A taxonomic treatment of vinaceous and reddish species of Tubaria (Agaricales) is presented based on morphology and nucleotide sequences. Accessions from western North America, Europe, Central America, the Caribbean, and Australia are compared. Phylogenetic analysis of the 25S rRNA gene and internal transcribed spacer (ITS) regions demonstrates that Tubaria is not monophyletic. However, the autonomy of six brown-spored, saprotrophic species˜Naucoria vinicolor, Pholiota serrulata, Phaeomarasmius confragosus, Pholiota punicea, Tubaria rufofulva, and T. bispora sp. nov.˜is affirmed. All six species form a strongly supported monophyletic group that we label section Confragosae in the genus Tubaria. This section is related to T. dispersa, T. albostipitata, and numerous representatives of the T. furfuracea complex. Tubaria minima is related to other lineages of dark-spored Agaricales. Taxonomic descriptions, illustrations, and a key to confirmed species of section Confragosae are provided. Four new combinations are proposed and one new species, T. bispora, is described as new from Costa Rica and Martinique.
S1806	C. D. Moon;J. J. Guillaumin;C. Ravel;C. Li;K. D. Craven;C. L. Schardl	2007	New Neotyphodium endophyte species from the grass tribes Stipeae and Meliceae	Mycologia							Several species of Achnatherum (grass tribe Stipeae) and Melica (tribe Meliceae) are typically infected by nonpathogenic, seed-transmissible fungi with characteristics of Neotyphodium species (mitosporic Clavicipitaceae). Molecular phylogenetic studies have clearly distinguished the endophytes from Achnatherum inebrians (from China), A. robustum, and A. eminens (both from North America), and indicate that the A. robustum, and A. eminens endophytes are hybrids with multiple Epichloë species (holomorphic Clavicipitaceae) as ancestors. Likewise, distinct hybrid origins are indicated for Neotyphodium species from the European Melica species, M. ciliata and M. transsilvanica, the South African species M. decumbens and M. racemosa, and the South American species M. stuckertii. Neotyphodium species have been described from A. inebrians (N. gansuense), A. eminens (N. chisosum), M. stuckertii (N. tembladerae), and the South African Melica species. However, the endophytes from A. robustum and the European Melica species have not been described, and the phylogenetic relationships of N. gansuense have not been investigated. Here we report a comprehensive study of morphological features and phylogenetic analyses of beta-tubulin and actin gene sequences on an expanded collection of endophytes from the Stipeae and Meliceae. These data provide a firm foundation for the description of two new Neotyphodium species, N. guerinii from M. ciliata and M. transsilvanica, and N. funkii from A. robustum. We also propose the new variety, N. gansuense var. inebrians for endophytes of A. inebrians from Xinjiang Province, which are morphologically and phylogenetically distinct from ˜ yet clearly related to ˜ N. gansuense from Gansu Province
S1838	J. Nuytinck;A. Verbeken;S. L. Miller	2007	Worldwide phylogeny of Lactarius section Deliciosi inferred from ITS and glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase gene sequences	Mycologia							A phylogenetic analysis of Lactarius sect. Deliciosi was performed based on collections of all known species. Several samples of each species were included, originating from a wide geographic range. The two DNA regions we used (ITS and a part of the gene encoding glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase), showed an incongruent phylogenetic signal. Much attention was paid to carefully observed macro- and micromorphological characters to draw taxonomic conclusions. We currently accept 38 taxa (31 species and 7 varieties) in Lactarius sect. Deliciosi on a worldwide scale; four species are new to science. More sampling is needed to resolve the status of the North American varieties. Our knowledge of the Asian species in this section remains fragmentary. The monophyly of the section and its position within Lactarius subgenus Piperites, as proposed in recent morphology-based classification schemes, is confirmed. The intrasectional relationships however, do not coincide with the colour of the latex (as previously supposed). Intercontinental conspecificity is very low in general. The name L. deliciosus is wrongfully applied in North and Central America and only two species seem to occur in both Asia and Europe.
S1926	M. S. Park;C. Culler;B. M. Pryor	2007	A re-examination of the phylogenetic relationship between the causal agents of carrot black rot, Alternaria radicina and A. carotiincultae	Mycologia							The phylogenetic relationship between Alternaria radicina and A. carotiincultae was re-examined based on morphology, sequence analysis of rDNA [ITS and mitochondrial small subunit (mtSSU)], protein coding genes [actin (ACT), ¥â-tubulin, chitin synthase (CHS), translation elongation factor (EF-1a), Alt a1, and glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (gpd)], and RAPD and ISSR analysis of total genomic DNA. Although some morphological characters overlapped to a degree, with A. radicina isolates expressing moderate variation and A. carotiincultae isolates being highly uniform, A. carotiincultae could be differentiated from A. radicina based on significantly greater growth rate on potato dextrose agar (PDA) or acidified PDA (APDA) and average number of trasverse septa per conidium. Sequence of rDNA and two protein coding genes, ACT and CHS, were invariant between species. However, polymorphism with the EF-1a, ¥â-tubulin, and Alt a1 gene strictly separated the population of A. radicina and A. carotiincultae as distinct lineages, as did RAPD and ISSR analysis. The polymorphic gpd gene did not strictly separate the two species. However, isolates of A. radicina encompassed several haplotypes, one of which was the exclusive haplotype possessed by A. carotiincultae isolates, suggesting evidence of incomplete lineage sorting. The results suggest that A. carotiincultae is very closely related to A. radicina, but is a recently divergent and distinct lineage, which supports its status as a separate species.
S1764	B. A. Perry;D. H. Pfister	2007	Chaetothiersia vernalis, a new genus and species of Pyronemataceae (Ascomycota, Pezizales) from California	Mycologia							Chaetothiersia vernalis, collected from the northern High Sierra Nevada of California, is described as a new genus and species. This fungus is characterized by stiff, superficial, brown excipular hairs, smooth, eguttulate ascospores, and a thin ectal excipulum composed of globose to angular-globose cells. Phylogenetic analyses of nLSU rDNA sequence data support the recognition of Chaetothiersia as a distinct genus, and suggest a close relationship to the genus Paratrichophaea.
S1707	A. Pinnoi;R. Jeewon;J. Sakayaroj;K. D. Hyde;E. B. G. Jones	2007	Berkleasmium crunisia sp. nov. and its phylogenetic affinities to the Pleosporales based on 18S and 28S rDNA sequence analyses	Mycologia							Berkleasmium crunisia sp. nov. is described from a decaying rachis of Calamus sp. (Arecaceae) from Khuan Ka Long, Satun Province, Thailand. This Berkleasmium species differs morphologically from other species in possessing subtending cells and larger conidia. The phylogenetic relationship of the genus Berkleasmium among sexual ascomycetes was also examined. Sequence analyses from 18S, 28S and ITS-5.8S rDNA were analysed phylogenetically under maximum parsimony, bayesian and neighbour- joining criteria. Phylogenies revealed that Berkleasmium is not monophyletic. Berkleasmium micronesicum and B. nigroapicale are phylogenetically related to Westerdykella cylindrica and Sporormia australis, which are members of the family Sporormiaceae (Pleosporales). Other species, including our new taxon, appear to share close phylogenetic affinities to other anamorphic fungi, whose classification within the Pleosporales are still obscure. Analyses also indicate that the 18S, 28S, ITS (+5.8S) rDNA and combined data (18S+28S) gene sequences fail to give enough phylogenetic resolution within the Pleosporales.
S1758	R. D. Reeleder	2007	Rhexocercosporidium panacis sp. nov., a new anamorphic species causing rusted root of ginseng (Panax quinquefolius)	Mycologia							A new species of the anamorphic genus Rhexocercosporidium is described. Isolates of a Rhexocercosporidium sp. were obtained from ginseng (Panax quinquefolius) roots with symptoms of rusted root. These isolates were found to be genetically and morphologically distinct from the only described species in this genus, R. carotae. Sequence data from the ribosomal DNA region spanning the internal transcribed spacers 1 and 2 and from a portion of the â-tubulin gene of the ginseng Rhexocercosporidium were compared to those of R. carotae. Parsimony analyses of sequence data showed that R. carotae and the ginseng isolates belonged to distinct clades. Conidia of a typical ginseng isolate were significantly shorter and possessed fewer septa than R. carotae, but shared rhexolytic secession of conidia with R. carotae. The binomial Rhexocercosporidium panacis is proposed to accommodate isolates of this genus that are associated with the rusted root disease.
S1945	R. Reese Næsborg	2007	Taxonomic revision of the Lecania cyrtella group (Ramalinaceae, lichenized Ascomycota) based on molecular and morphological evidence	Mycologia							This investigation aims to elucidate the relationships within the Lecania cyrtella group by utilizing morphological and molecular methods. The morphological studies included eleven species L. cyrtella, L. cyrtellina, L. dubitans, L. erysibe, L. hutchinsiae, L. leprosa, L. madida, L. prasinoides, L. sambucina, L. sordida, and L. sylvestris, and a key to the species plus species descriptions are provided. Lecania madida, a new species from the Pacific Northwest of America, L. leprosa, a new species from Eastern Europe, and L. sordida, a new species from Europe, are described here, and the known range extension of L. prasinoides is greatly expanded to include the Baltic countries, the Nordic countries, and Western Canada. Lectotypes are designated for L. cyrtella and L. sambucina. The molecular relationships within the group were examined utilizing haplotype network estimations and phylogenetic reconstructions. Part of the IGS region as well as the complete ITS region were sequenced and analyzed. Both the haplotype network and the phylogenetic analyses indicate that the included species, as conceived in the morphological examinations, all are monophyletic.
S1793	C. L. Schoch;R. A. Shoemaker;K. A. Seifert;S. Hambleton;J. W. Spatafora;P. W. Crous	2007	A multigene phylogeny of the Dothideomycetes using four nuclear loci	Mycologia							We present an expanded multigene phylogeny of the Dothideomycetes. The final data matrix consisted of 4 loci (nuc SSU rDNA, nuc LSU rDNA, tef1, RPB2) for 96 taxa, representing 5 of the 7 orders in the current classification of Dothideomycetes and several outgroup taxa representative of the major clades in the Pezizomycotina. The resulting phylogeny differentiated two main dothideomycete lineages comprising the pseudoparaphysate Pleosporales and aparaphysate Dothideales. We propose the subclasses Pleosporomycetidae (order Pleosporales) and Dothideomycetidae (orders Dothideales, Capnodiales and Myriangiales). Furthermore, we provide strong molecular support for the placement of Mycosphaerellaceae and Piedraiaceae within the Capnodiales, and introduce Davidiellaceae as a new family to accommodate species of Davidiella with Cladosporium anamorphs. Some taxa could not be placed with certainty (e.g., Hysteriales), but there was strong support for new groupings. The clade containing members of the genera Botryosphaeria and Guignardia resolved well but without support for any relationship to any other described orders and we hereby propose the new order Botryosphaeriales. These data are also consistent with the removal of Chaetothyriales and Coryneliales from the Dothideomycetes and strongly support their placement in the Eurotiomycetes.
S1680	S. H. Wu;D. M. Wang;E. Tschen	2007	Brunneocorticium pyriforme, a new corticioid fungal genus and species belonging to the euagarics clade	Mycologia							Evidence derived from molecular studies in recent years, has revealed that the corticioid fungal genera are present in all major clades of Homobasidiomycetes. Brunneocorticium pyriforme, a corticioid fungal new genus and new species belonging to the euagarics clade, is proposed in this study. This new taxon has been collected from subtropical-tropical Taiwan and southern Yunnan Province of China. Its basidiocarps were quite often found on bark of living Murraya spp. (Rutaceae). The collections without good fertile parts were frequently encountered. Brunneocorticium pyriforme has resupinate basidiocarp and smooth hymenial surface. It has dimitic hyphal system, with nodose-septate generative hyphae and abundant yellowish brown skeletal hyphae. Leptocystidia are occasionally present. Its basidia are 2-sterigmate and basidiospores are pear-shaped. Phylogenetic analysis based on sequence data derived from LSU rDNA indicated that taxonomic placement of Brunneocorticium is in the euagarics clade of Homobasidiomycetes, and is closely related to the agaricoid genera like Marasmiellus, Campanella etc. This molecular analysis also supports independent status of Brunneocorticium, from other corticioid genera with similar morphological features.
S1769	U. Arup;S. Ekman;M. Grube;J. E. Mattsson;M. Wedin	2007	The sister group relation of Parmeliaceae (Lecanorales, Ascomycota)	Mycologia	99	1	42-49	10.3852/mycologia.99.1.42			The family Parmeliaceae (Lecanorales, Ascomycota) is possibly the largest, best-known and most thoroughly studied lichen family within its order. Despite this fact the relationship between Parmeliaceae and other groups in Lecanorales is still poorly known. The aim of the present study is to contribute to finding the sister-group to Parmeliaceae, as an aid for future studies on the phylogeny and character evolution of the group. We do this by sampling all potential relatives to the Parmeliaceae that we have identified, i.e. Gypsoplaca, Japewia, Mycoblastus, Protoparmelia, and Tephromela, a good representation of the major groups within the Parmeliaceae s. lat., and a good representation of other taxa in the core-Lecanorales. We use molecular data from two genes, nuclear LSU and mitochondrial SSU rDNA, and a Bayesian analysis of the combined data. The results show that the closest relatives to Parmeliaceae are the two genera Protoparmelia and Gypsoplaca, which are crustose lichens. Parmeliaceae in our sense is a well-supported group, including also the family segregates Alectoriaceae, Hypogymniaceae, Usneaceae, and Anziaceae. The results also indicate that the family Mycoblastaceae is monophyletic only if Tephromelataceae is included and that neither Calvitimela nor Mycoblastus are monophyletic.
S2169	J. F. Bischoff;S. A. Rehner;R. A. Humber	2008	A multilocus phylogeny of the Metarhizium anisopliae lineage	Mycologia							Metarhizium anisopliae, the type species of the anamorphic entomopathogenic genus Metarhizium, is currently composed of four varieties, including the type variety, and has been demonstrated to be closely related to M. taii, M. pingshaense, and M. guizhouense. In this study we evaluate phylogenetic relationships within the M. anisopliae complex, identify monophyletic lineages and clarify the species taxonomy. To this end, we have employed a multigene phylogenetic approach utilizing near-complete sequences from nuclear encoded EF-1?, RPB1, RPB2, and ?-tubulin gene regions and evaluated the morphology of these taxa, including ex-types whenever possible. The phylogenetic evidence supports the monophyly of these varieties. We propose that they be elevated to species level as: M. acridum stat. nov., M. lepidiotae stat. nov., and M. majus stat. nov. In addition, we resurrect the name M. brunneum as a sister group to M. anisopliae and show that M. taii is a later synonym of M. guizhouense.
S2170	J. Blaszkowski;G. M. Kovács;T. Balázs	2008	Glomus perpusillum, a new arbuscular mycorrhizal fungus	Mycologia							A new arbuscular mycorrhizal fungal species of the genus Glomus, G. perpusillum (Glomeromycota), forming small, hyaline spores is described and illustrated. Spores of G.perpusillum were formed in hypogeous aggregates and occasionally inside roots. They are 38 globose to subglobose, (10-)24(-30) ìm diam, rarely egg-shaped, oblong to irregular, 18-25 x 25-63 ìm. Their wall consists of two permanent layers: a finely laminate, semiflexible to rigid outer layer and a flexible to semiflexible inner layer. The inner layer becomes plastic and frequently highly contracts in spores vigorously crushed in PVLG-based mountants and stains reddish white to grayish red in Melzer‚s reagent. Glomus perpusillum was originally associated with roots of Ammophila arenaria colonizing sandy dunes of the Mediterranean Sea adjacent to Calambrone (Italy) and this is the only site of its occurrence known to date. In one-species cultures with Plantago lanceolata as the host plant, G. perpusillum formed 46 vesicular-arbuscular mycorrhizae. Phylogenetic analyses of partial SSU sequences of nrDNA placed the species into the Glomus group A with no affinity to its subgroups. The sequences of G. perpusillum unambiguously separated from the sequences of described Glomus species and formed a distinct clade among with in planta arbuscular fungal sequences from Alpine plants.
S2112	M. L. Davey;A. Tsuneda;R. S. Currah	2008	Evidence that the gemmae of Papulaspora sepedonioides are neotenous perithecia	Mycologia	100		626-635				Papulaspora sepedonioides produces large multicellular gemmae with several, thick walled central cells enclosed within a sheath of smaller thin-walled cells. Phylogenetic analysis of the large subunit rDNA indicates P. sepedonioides has affinities to the Melanosporales (Hypocreomycetidae). The development of gemmae in P. sepedonioides was characterized by light, and scanning and transmission electron microscopy, and was similar to previous ontogenetic studies of ascomata development in the Melanosporales. However, rather than giving rise to ascogenous tissues, the central cells of the incipient gemmae became darkly pigmented, thick walled, and filled with lipid globules while the contents of the sheath cells autolysed, leaving them empty and deflated at maturity. Both central cells and pre-autolytic sheath cells produced both germ tubes and new gemmae primordia, suggesting microcyclic conidiogenesis occurs in this species. Mature gemmae were non-deciduous or seceded by schizolytic secession and appear to have both perennating and disseminative potential. The evolution of these neotenous perithecial propagules may be driven by life history and ecological factors selecting for functional versatility.
S2010	E. M. de Meyer;Z. W. d Beer;R. C. Summerbell;A. M. Moharram;G. S. d Hoog;H. F. Vismer;M. J. Wingfield	2008	Taxonomy and phylogeny of new wood- and soil-inhabiting Sporothrix species in the Ophiostoma stenoceras - Sporothrix schenckii complex	Mycologia							Sporothrix, one of the anamorph genera of Ophiostoma, includes the important human pathogen S. schenckii and various fungi associated with insects and sapstain of wood. A survey of fungi from wooden utility poles in South Africa yielded two distinct groups of Sporothrix isolates from different geographical areas. DNA sequence and morphological data derived in this study showed that isolates in these groups represent two novel species in the S. schenckii ˆ O. stenoceras species complex. A new species isolated from pine poles and rosebush wood and phylogenetically closely related to S. pallida, is described here as Sporothrix stylites. Phylogenetic analysis also confirmed the synonymy of S. albicans and S. nivea with S. pallida. Sporothrix stylites and S. pallida are also closely related to the isolates from soil, previously treated as Œenvironmental‚ isolates of S. schenckii. Soil isolates are clearly distinct from human isolates of S. schenckii. We describe the former here as Sporothrix humicola. The isolates from eucalypt poles group peripheral to most other species in the S. schenckii - O. stenoceras complex, and are newly described as Sporothrix lignivora. Phylogenetic analysis of sequences of isolates from soil and wood together with those of clinical isolates showed that the human-pathogenic strains form an aggregate of several cryptic species.
S2162	D. E. Desjardin;A. W. Wilson;M. Binder	2008	Durianella, a new gasteroid genus of boletes from Malesia	Mycologia							Hydnangium echinulatum, described originally from a single specimen collected in Malaysia, has been recollected, and based on morphological and molecular characters is recognized as representing a new gasteroid genus of boletes with affinities to the Boletineae, herein named Durianella. Diagnostic features include an epigeous, ovoid, pyramidal-warted, durian fruit-like basidiome with gelatinized glebal locules and a columella that turns indigo blue upon exposure, and subglobose basidiospores with long, curved, thin-walled and collapsible spines. A redescription, phylogenetic analysis and comparison with allied taxa are presented.
S2092	C. Douanla-Meli;E. Langer	2008	Phylogenetic relationship of Marasmius mbalmayoensis sp. nov. to the the tropical African Marasmius bekolacongoli complex based on nuc-LSU rDNA sequences	Mycologia	100	3	445-454				Marasmius mbalmayoensis (Basidiomycotina, Marasmiaceae) growing on decayed leaves of Canarium schweinfurthii in the Mbalmayo Forest Reserve, Cameroon, is described. The species is remarkable by the large basidiomata with shallow orange yellow umbilicus, long central stipe accompanied by similar long rhizomorphs on thickened basal mycelium and large lacrymiform to sigmoid basidiospores. Macroscopically, the coarsely plicate pilei with lilac, violet to dark violaceous tints, and large distant adnate lamellae are reminiscent of the tropical African species M. bekolacongoli. The phylogenetic relationship among M. mbalmayoensis and M. bekolacongoli was assessed, extended to other species of sects. Globulares and Sicci based on DNA sequences. Phylogenetic analysis based on nuc-LSU rDNA sequence data of selected marasmioid taxa using parsimony and Bayesian analysis supported the placement of M. mbalmayoensis in Marasmius, well distinct from M. bekolacongoli, and suggested its monophyly with Amyloflagellula inflata. The findings also indicated the complexity of M. bekolacongoli.
S1948	C. R. Grünig;A. Duò;T. N. Sieber;O. Holdenrieder	2008	Assignment of species rank to six reproductively isolated cryptic species of the Phialocephala fortinii s.l. - Acephala applanata species complex	Mycologia							Phialocephala fortinii s.l. and Acephala applanata are the dominant dark septate endophytes (DSE) in roots of many trees and shrubs. Population genetic analysis led to the discovery of morphologically indistinguishable but reproductively isolated cryptic species (CSP) within Phialocephala fortinii s.l. In the present study we show, that sequence data of two coding (beta-tubulin and translation elongation factor (EF-1alpha)) and three non-coding DNA loci confirm subdivision of P. fortinii s.l. and allow to differentiate seven CSP of P. fortinii. In addition, we show that strains collected throughout Europe can be classified correctly based on these sequence markers. Statistically significant differences in growth response on different media were observed among CSP of P. fortinii and A. applanata. Growth inhibition on MEA amended with 100 mgl-1 cycloheximide had the strongest differential effect of all physiological traits examined. In contrast, exoenzyme production (laccase, proteinase, pectinase, phenol-oxidase, amylase, cytochrome oxidase, and tyrosinase) rarely helped to differentiate CSP of P. fortinii. However, A. applanata was a strong producer of amylases, laccases, and proteinases. Based on these data we propose to assign species rank to six CSP of P. fortinii: P. turiciensis, P. letzii, P. europaea, P. helvetica, P. uotolensis, P. subalpina spp. nov. and P. fortinii s.s.
S2108	W. M. Jaklitsch;C. P. Kubicek;I. S. Druzhinina	2008	Three European species of Hypocrea with reddish-brown stromata and green ascospores	Mycologia							The European species Hypocrea epimyces (Hypocreales, Ascomycota, Fungi) is re-described based on the holotype including the drawing on its envelope by Saccardo and freshly collected material. The holomorphs of two closely related species, H. alni and H. brunneoviridis, are described as new species of the genus. They are characterized with morphological and molecular methods, including culture studies, and phylogenetic analyses using the internal transcribed spacers 1 and 2 as a part of the ribosomal RNA gene cluster, calmodulin, endochitinase, intron 4 of the translation elongation factor 1-alpha gene, and a part of the RNA polymerase II subunit B gene as phylogenetic markers. All species described here have green ascospores. Although phylogenetically closely related to H. lixii, they form reddish-brown instead of green to black stromata. Except for H. brunneoviridis, forming nearly gliocladium-like conidiophores, the anamorphs of these species are similar to each other, but vary in the angles of conidiophore branches and phialides, in phenotypic arrangement of conidiation on growth plates and in growth rates of cultures.
S2128	R. W. Kerrigan;P. Callac;L. A. Parra	2008	New and rare taxa in Agaricus section Bivelares (Duploannulati)	Mycologia							Recent field and laboratory studies have led to our recognition of new taxa in Agaricus section Bivelares, a recent combination and now the earliest synonym and correct name of section Duploannulati. Agaricus cupressophilus and A. tlaxcalensis, in the new subsection Cupressorum, and A. agrinferus, A. devoniensis subsp. bridghamii, and A. subsubensis in subsection Hortenses, are described. Phylogeny reconstruction methods using ITS1+2 DNA sequences were used to determine appropriate placements of the new taxa. Collectively these new taxa and phylogenetic associations represent a substantial augmentation and clarification of our knowledge of section Bivelares: described, sequenced species-level taxa in the northern hemisphere are increased from 6 to 10, a distinct subsectional lineage is revealed, and infraspecific resolution within A. devoniensis is improved. An anomalous ITS1+2 sequence is documented in one collection of A. subsubensis. Preliminary data on another novel member of Bivelares from France are also provided. Several of these taxa are rare, highlighting opportunities and challenges for documenting biodiversity in this group. Additional comments on related taxa treated in recent publications are also provided.
S2101	G. M. Kovács;J. M. Trappe;A. M. Alsheikh;K. Bóka;T. F. Elliott	2008	Imaia, a new truffle genus to accommodate Terfezia gigantea	Mycologia							Originally described from Japan by Sanshi Imai in 1933, the hypogeous ascomycete Terfezia gigantea was subsequently discovered in the Appalachian Mountains of the USA. Morphological, electron microscopic, and phylogenetic studies of specimens collected in both regions revealed that, despite this huge geographic disjunction, (1) the Japanese and Appalachian specimens are remarkably similar both in morphology and the sampled rDNA sequences, (2) the species unambiguously falls into the Morchellaceae and is separated from the genus Terfezia in the Pezizaceae, (3) its spores are much larger than those of Terfezia spp. and are enclosed in a unique, electron-semitransparent, amorphous epispore that appears to be permeated with minute, meandering strands or canals. In addition to the molecular phylogenetic results, the numerous nuclei in ascospores, the dome shaped striate ascus septal plugs and the long cylindric Woronon bodies also strengthen the family assignment to the Morchellaceae. Moreover, the species occurs in moist, temperate forests as opposed to the xeric to arid habitats of other Terfezia spp. We propose the new, monotypic genus Imaia to accommodate the species.
S1994	D. L. Lindner;M. T. Banik	2008	Molecular phylogeny of Laetiporus and other brown-rot polypore genera in North America	Mycologia							Phylogenetic relationships were investigated among North American species of <i>Laetiporus, Leptoporus, Phaeolus, Pycnoporellus</i> and <i>Wolfiporia</i> using ITS, nuclear large subunit and mitochondrial small subunit rDNA sequences. Members of these genera have poroid hymenophores, simple septate hyphae and cause brown rots in a variety of substrates. Analyses indicate that <i>Laetiporus</i> and <i>Wolfiporia</i> are not monophyletic. All North American <i>Laetiporus</i> species formed a well-supported monophyletic group (the „core <i>Laetiporus</i> clade‰ or <i>Laetiporus</i> s.s.) with the exception of <i>L. persicinus</i>, which showed little affinity for any genus for which sequence data are available. Based on data from GenBank, the southern hemisphere species <i>L. portentosus</i> also fell well outside the core <i>Laetiporus</i> clade. <i>Wolfiporia dilatohypha</i> was found to represent a sister group to the core <i>Laetiporus</i> clade. Isolates of <i>Phaeolus, Pycnoporellus</i> and members of the core <i>Laetiporus</i> clade all fell within the Antrodia clade of polypores, while <i>Leptoporus mollis</i> and <i>Laetiporus portentosus</i> fell within the phlebioid clade of polypores. <i>Wolfiporia cocos</i> isolates also fell in the Antrodia clade, in contrast to previous studies that placed <i>W. cocos</i> in the core polyporoid clade. ITS analyses resolved eight clades within <i>Laetiporus</i> s.s., three of which may represent undescribed species. A combined analysis using the three DNA regions resolved five major clades within <i>Laetiporus</i> s.s.: a clade containing conifer-inhabiting species („Conifericola clade‰), a clade containing <i>L. cincinnatus</i> („Cincinnatus clade‰), a clade containing <i>L. sulphureus</i> s.s. isolates with yellow pores („Sulphureus clade I‰), a clade containing <i>L. sulphureus</i> s.s. isolates with white pores („Sulphureus clade II‰) and a clade containing <i>L. gilbertsonii</i> and unidentified isolates from the Caribbean („Gilbertsonii clade‰). Although there is strong support for groups within the core <i>Laetiporus</i> clade, relationships among these groups remain poorly resolved.
S2123	S. Niinomi;S. Takamatsu;M. Havrylenko	2008	Molecular data do not support a Southern Hemisphere base of Nothofagus powdery	Mycologia							Three powdery mildew species present on Nothofagus, viz. Erysiphe magellanica, E. nothofagi and E. patagoniaca, are endemic to South America and have unique ascomatal appendages that are not found in powdery mildews of Northern Hemisphere. We determined the nucleotide sequences of the rDNA internal transcribed spacer regions and D1/D2 domains of the 28S rDNA of these three powdery mildew species to reveal their phylogenetic relationships with powdery mildews of the Northern Hemisphere. Although the molecular phylogenetic analyses indicated that the three Nothofagus powdery mildews are closely related to each other, they did not group into one clade in either the ITS or 28S trees. Kishino-Hasegawa, Shimodaira-Hasegawa and Templeton tests could not significantly reject the constrained trees that were constructed based on the assumption that the Nothofagus powdery mildews would form a single clade. Based on this result and the evidence that all Nothofagus powdery mildews are endemic to South America and have similar morphological characteristics, it is likely that these three species diverged from a single ancestor present on Nothofagus. Calibration of evolutionary events using molecular clocks suggested that the Nothofagus powdery mildews split from the Northern Hemisphere relatives 22ˆ16 million years ago (Ma) in the middle Miocene, and divergence among the Nothofagus powdery mildews occurred 17ˆ13 Ma. These results do not support a Southern Hemisphere base of the Nothofagus powdery mildews.
S2205	D. Pavlic;M. J. Wingfield;P. A. Barber;B. Slippers;G. E. S. Hardy;T. I. Burgess	2008	Seven new species of the Botryosphaeriaceae from baobab and other native trees in Western Australia	Mycologia							In this study, seven new species of the Botryosphaeriaceae are described from baobab (Adansonia gibbosa) and surrounding endemic tree species growing in the Kimberley region of northwestern Australia. Members of the Botryosphaeriaceae were predominantly endophytes isolated from apparently healthy sapwood and bark of endemic trees; others were isolated from dying branches. Phylogenetic analyses of ITS and EF1-á sequence data revealed seven new species: Dothiorella longicollis, Fusicoccum ramosum Lasiodiplodia margaritacea, Neoscytalidium novaehollandiae, Pseudofusicoccum adansoniae, P. ardesiacum and P. kimberleyense.
S2181	M. Senda;K. Kageyama;H. Suga;C. A. Lévesque	2008	Two new species of Pythium isolated from cool-temperate forest soil in Japan	Mycologia							Pythium senticosum and P. takayamanum spp. nov. were isolated from the A horizon layer of the soils under deciduous broad-leaved forest and cool-temperate cedar forest of Japan, respectively. P. senticosum is a fast-growing species and grows even at 5&#730;C with a radial growth. The species is characterized by the ovoid to ellipsoid sporangia with an apical papilla, the ornamented oogonia with acute conical spines, the bell-shaped antheridial cells and the amphigynous-like antheridia. P. takayamanum is a high-temperature growing species that can grow even at 35&#730;C. The species is morphologically characterized by the wavy antheridial stalk and ellipsoidal bent oogonia.
S2120	S. Somrithipol;S. Sakayaroj;N. Rungjindamai;N. Plaingam;E. B. G. Jones	2008	Phylogenetic relationship of the coelomycete genus Infundibulomyces based on nuclear rDNA data	Mycologia							The phylogenetic relationship of the coelomycete genus Infundibulomyces with cupulate-conidiomata, was assessed by ribosomal DNA sequences: partial small subunit (SSU) and partial large subunit (LSU) regions using maximum parsimony and Bayesian analysis. The genus has no known teleomorph. A new species, Infundibulomyces oblongisporus is described from collections on a senescent angiosperm leaf from Thailand based on morphological and phylogenetic evidence. Both Infundibulomyces species form a monophyletic group in the Chaetosphaeriaceae (Chaetosphaeriales, Sordariomycetidae) with Dictyochaeta simplex as a sister clade. There is no previous report of the Chaetosphaeriaceae with a coelomycete anamorph.
S2124	K. Sotome;T. Hattori;Y. Ota;C. To-anun;B. Salleh;M. Kakishima	2008	Phylogenetic relationships of Polyporus and morphologically allied genera	Mycologia							Polyporus accommodates morphologically heterogeneous species and is divided into six infrageneric groups based on macro-morphological characters. On the other hand, there are allied genera having macro- and microscopic characters similar to those of Polyporus. The phylogenetic relationships of Polyporus and allied genera were established from sequences of RNA polymerase II second largest subunit (RPB2), nuclear ribosomal large subunit (nucLSU), and mitochondrial ATPase subunit 6 (ATP6). The molecular phylogenetic trees confirmed that Polyporus is a polyphyletic genus and recognized six major clades (Clades 1-6) containing species of Polyporus and several allied genera. Among the detected six clades, Clade 1 contained three infrageneric groups of Polyporus and two allied genera, Datronia and Pseudofavolus, while Clade 6 contained Group Polyporellus and Lentinus. On the other hand, five of the six major clades contained species belonging to a single infrageneric group, Favolus, Melanopus, Polyporellus or Polyporus. These results suggest that the morphological characters used to define these groups have phylogenetic significance and revealed the need for a taxonomic revision of Polyporus and its allied genera.
S2398	Y. Kang;Y. L. Ji;W. Li;X. H. Sun;L. H. Zhan;H. S. Yu;Z. W. Wang	2008	Taxonomy of Neotyphodium endophytes of Chinese native Roegneria plants	Mycologia	101	2	211-219	10.3852/08-018			Neotyphodium endophytes are asexual clavicipitaceous fungi that commonly infect cool-season C3 grasses. In genus Neotyphodium, 17 species and 5 varieties have been described. In this study we describe a new Neotyphodium species, Neotyphodium sinica found in natural symbiosis with asymptomatic Roegneria spp. (Elymus spp.) native to China. We investigated the host specificity, morphology, mating compatibility and molecular phylogenetic evidences of this new species. N. sinica is host specific and seedborne, and widely distribute in China. Most morphological characteristics of this new species are typical in Neotyphodium genus, but the growth rate of N. sinica on PDA plates tends to be more rapid. The 3/5 N. sinica strains had double alleles of tefA and 2/5 strains have double alleles of tubB and tefA. Phylogenetic relationships based on sequences of tubB introns and tefA introns revealed that the allele-1 of tefA and tubB clustered together in a distinct sub-clade in E. bromicola/E. yangzii clade. The allele-2 was in ETC. N. sinica should be an interspecific hybrid which had relationship with both E. yangzii and ETC. In mating tests, N. sinica failed to hybridize with E. yangzii. Referring to major area of their distribution, we propose ¡°Neotyphodium sinica Z. Wang, Y. Ji et Y. Kang, sp. nov.¡± for this new species.
S2273	L. J. Iannone;D. Cabral;C. L. Schardl;M. S. Rossi	2008	Phylogenetic divergence, morphological and physiological differences distinguish a new Neotyphodium endophyte species in the grass Bromus auleticus from South America	Mycologia	101	3	340-351	10.3852/08-156			The fungi of the genus Neotyphodium are systemic, constitutive, symbionts of grasses species of the subfamily Pooideae. In the Southern hemisphere, most of these asexual endophytes are the result of the hybridization between two sexual species from Northern hemisphere, Epichloë festucae and E. typhina. However, the ancestral sexual species have not been detected in this region. Several grasses from Argentina are infected by Neotyphodium species. These endophytes are in general very similar at macro- and micro-morphological levels, and phylogenetically conform to the species N. tembladerae. However the Neotyphodium spp. endophytes of some hosts, as Bromus auleticus and Poa rigidifolia have not been included in this species. In this work we studied the incidence and characterized the diversity of Neotyphodium species in populations of the native grass Bromus auleticus from Argentina. The incidence of endophytes was 100% in all populations investigated. Two groups of endophytes were differentiated by their morphologies, growth rates, conidial onthogenies, and by relative resistance to the fungicide benomyl. Phylogenetic trees inferred from tefA and tubB intron sequences indicated that both N. tembladerae and the novel morphotype were hybrids of E. festucae and E. typhina, but the ancestral E. typhina genotype distinguished them. Isolates from plants that inhabit coastal dunes, xerophytic forest, savannahs and hills were morphologically and phylogenetically similar to N. tembladerae, whereas the endophytes from the humid pampa plains conformed to the novel group. We propose to consider the endophyte of Bromus auleticus from humid pampas as a new species: Neotyphodium pampeanum.
S2269	P. Inderbitzin;Y. R. Mehta;M. L. Berbee	2008	Pleospora species with Stemphylium anamorphs: a four locus phylogeny resolves new lineages yet does not distinguish among species in the Pleospora herbarum clade	Mycologia	101	3	329-339	10.3852/08-071			Stemphylium is a genus of plant pathogens and saprobes in the Pleosporaceae (Pleosporales, Dothideomycetes, Ascomycetes). The teleomorphs of Stemphylium, where known, are in Pleospora, with Pleospora herbarum as the type. The goal of this study was to present a rigorous phylogenetic analysis of the relationships among Stemphylium isolates with particular emphasis on species delimitation in the P. herbarum clade, on possible new species and on the relationship of clades to cultures from type specimens. Our taxon sampling comprised 110 Stemphylium strains collected worldwide from various hosts and DNA sequences from four loci, from the ITS, the protein encoding GPD and EF-1 alpha genes, and the intergenic spacer between vmaA and vpsA. A large EF-1 alpha intron delimited by non-canonical splice sites and encoding putative proteins was present in three unrelated isolates and was excluded from analyses. Isolates used comprised 23 representatives derived from type strains, compared to type strains or otherwise connected to type material, 40 unnamed strains morphologically similar to the type P. herbarum, four strains from an outbreak of Stemphylium leaf blight of cotton in Brazil, and eight strains collected in British Columbia mainly from non-agricultural hosts. Our results provided strong support for the main groupings of Stemphylium obtained earlier but also revealed six possible new species. Other variation within morphological species may point to additional cryptic species. On the other hand, even with four loci, cultures ex-type of five species including P. herbarum were inseparable. We speculate that being self-fertile, the clade including P. herbarum might represent a group of highly inbred, morphologically distinct lineages that have yet to accumulate detectable species-specific sequence variation. The lack of variation in P. herbarum clade contrasts with many other a priori defined morphological species where multigene phylogenetic analyses revealed new cryptic species.
S2252	Y. L. Ji;L. H. Zhan;Y. Kang;X. H. Sun;H. S. Yu;Z. W. Wang	2009	A new stromata-producing Neotyphodium species symbiotic with clonal grass Calamagrostis epigeios (L.) Roth. grown in China	Mycologia							We describe a new stromata producing Neotyphodium species symbiotic with clonal Calamagrostis epigeios (L.) Roth.. Stromata on the grass 47.5¨C186 mm long, occurred frequently, but neither perithecium nor mature ascus was observed. Morphology of fungal isolates obtained from symptomatic and asymptomatic tillers were identical to each other, and similar to those of epichlo&euml; endophytes. In phylogenetic analysis, all selected 5 fungal isolates clustered into a significantly distinct clade based on sequences of œÂ-tubulin gene (tubB) introns and translation elongation factor 1-œÁ gene (tefA) introns with bootstrap values of 99 %, supporting erect of a new species. Concerning about the production of extremely long stromata on the host plants and absence of sexual spores, we propose ¡°Neotyphodium stromatolongus Y. Ji, L. Zhan et Z. Wang, sp. nov.¡± for this new species.
S2318	Y. G. Chen;Y. L. Ji;H. S. Yu;Z. W. Wang	2009	A new Neotyphodium species from Festuca parvigluma Steud. grown in China	Mycologia	101	5	681-685	10.3852/08-181			Neotyphodium species evolved from Epichlo&euml; species are asexual, seedborne in many cool-season grasses. Here, we proposed a new species inhabiting in Festuca parvigluma Steud. native to China. Morphology, host specificity and molecular phylogenetic evidences supported erection of this new species. Sequences of Â-tubulin gene (tubB) introns and translation elongation factor 1- Á gene (tefA) introns presented two copies in all 5 isolates tested. In phylogenetic analysis, copy 1 closely related with E. yangzii in EBY clade, copy 2 with E. typhina in ETC, indicating this new species possibly origin from hybridization of these two clades. Referring to distribution area of host plants, ¡°Neotyphodium sinofestucae Y. Ji, Y. Chen et Z. Wang, sp. nov.¡± was proposed for this new species.
S2338	T. D'Elia;R. Veerapaneni;V. Theraisnathan;S. O. Rogers	2009	Isolation of fungi from Lake Vostok accretion ice	Mycologia	101	6	751-763	10.3852/08-184			Here, we report the characterization of fungi from ten accretion ice sections (3,300 to 5,100 years old), as well as two deep glacial ice sections that are close to the bottom of the glacier (1 to 2 million years old) from the Vostok, Antarctica 5G ice core. Fungi were characterized by fluorescence microscopy, culturing, and sequence analyses of ribosomal DNA internal transcribed spacers. A total of 270 fungal colonies were cultured from the accretion ice of subglacial Lake Vostok, and an additional 14 from the glacial ice immediately above the accretion ice. Mean cell concentrations were from 0 to 4.42 cells ml-1 of ice meltwater, of which 0 to 100% were viable (as determined by fluorescence microscopy). Thirty-one unique fungal ribosomal DNA sequences (28 from accretion ice and 3 from glacial ice) were determined and compared to recent taxa. The results, plus tests for growth of low temperatures, indicate that Lake Vostok contains a mixture of heterotrophic psychrotolerant fungal species. This indicates that the lake is not sterile, but contains a unique ecosystem.
S2381	A. M. Fiore-Donno;E. F. Haskins;J. Pawlowski;T. Cavalier-Smith	2009	Semimorula liquescens is a modified echinostelid myxomycete (Mycetozoa)	Mycologia	101	6	773-776	10.3852/08-075			The enigmatic Semimorula liquescens E.F. Haskins, McGuin. & C.S. Berry has been isolated repeatedly from dried infructescences of Lythrum salicaria collected from Seattle and Kirkland, Washington. Detailed developmental, morphological and ultrastructural studies suggested that it represents a taxon within Mycetozoa, closely allied with Myxogastria (Myxomycetes), but with unique characteristics. Phylogeny based on two genes places it with confidence into the family Echinosteliidae. This species differs from a typical Echinostelium in the way spores germinate and in the lack of a stalked sporophore, the latter being a secondary loss. Semimorula liquescens may therefore be a useful "negative" model to search for genes inducing stalk formation during sporulation.
S2364	C. F. Villalta;D. J. Jacobson;J. W. Taylor	2009	Three new phylogenetic and biological Neurospora species: N. hispaniola, N. metzenbergii, and N. perkinsii	Mycologia	101	6	777-789	10.3852/08-219			The recent recognition of provisional Neurospora Phylogenetic Species (PS) 1 3 provided us with the opportunity to compare genetic isolation, which underlies phylogenetic species recognition (PSR), with reproductive isolation as criteria for recognizing new species. This investigation involved first finding new individuals of PS 1 3 from a search of the Perkins culture collection, then assessing genetic isolation by PSR for old and new members of PS 1 3, and finally comparing species recognition by genetic isolation as determined by PSR to species recognition by reproductive isolation as determined by biological species recognition (BSR) and geographic distribution. To facilitate the search for additional members of the PS, we used the genetic variation originally used to discover Neurospora PS 1-3 to easily distinguish members of Neurospora PS1 3 from the closely related species N. crassa and N. intermedia. To increase our chance of success, the analysis was performed on N. crassa and N. intermedia isolates that were either not clearly assignable to species by BSR using tester strains, or that were from the same geographic locations as the known members of PS1 3. Eleven new members of Neurospora PS 1 3 were identified: one new PS1, nine new PS2, and one new PS3. To complement PSR, we investigated reproductive isolation using BSR in PS1 3 and the two other most closely related species, N. intermedia and N. crassa using intraspecific and interspecific crosses. PS1 and PS2 appear reproductively isolated because they successfully mated intraspecifically and not interspecifically. PS3 isolates successfully crossed with other PS3 isolates, however, they also successfully crossed with N. crassa, as previously reported, indicating that genetic isolation can precede reproductive isolation. We compared phylogenetic, mating, and geographical data to challenge the use of PSR as the main criterion in the formal description of species and, having failed to discredit the approach, describe the new species, N. hispaniola (PS1), N. metzenbergii (PS2), and N. perkinsii (PS3).
S2399	J. S. Lee;Y. W. Lim	2009	Cerrena aurantiopora sp. nov. (Polyporaceae) from East Asia	Mycologia	102	1	211-216	10.3852/09-048			A new species of polypore in the genus Cerrena was discovered in Kangwon Province, Korea. The resupinate basidiocarp and light orange, poroid hymenophore were different enough for it to be distinguished from previously recorded species of Cerrena, C. consors, C. cystidiata, C. sclerodepsis and C. unicolor. Based on the results of morphological and phylogenetic analyses, we propose this new polypore as Cerrena aurantiopora sp. nov.
S2548	G. K. Mugambi;S. M. Huhndorf	2010	Multigene phylogeny of the Coronophorales: morphology and new species in the order	Mycologia	102	1	185-210	10.3852/09-043			The phylogenetic relationships within Coronophorales have long been debated because of uncertainty over the level of taxonomic usefulness of the distinguishing characterisitics such as quellkörper, number of ascospores per ascus, presence of ascospore appendages, presence of subiculum, and ascomatal vestiture. The phylogenetic relationships within Coronophorales are examined using DNA sequence data from three nuclear genes targeting 69 taxa representing new collections from Africa, North, South and Central America and resulting in 130 new sequences. The analyses recovered monophyletic Bertiaceae, Chaetosphaerellaceae, and Scortechiniaceae and confirmed a paraphyletic Nitschkiaceae. A single collection of Coronophora gregaria is included and Coronophoraceae is accepted for the genus. The concept of Bertiaceae is expanded to include Gaillardiella and Thaxteria is synonymized with Bertia with a new combination, B. didyma. Three new species of Bertia are described: B. ngongensis from Kenya, B. orbis from Kenya and Costa Rica and B. triseptata from Ecuador and Puerto Rico. Bertia gigantospora is transferred from Nitschkia. Scortechiniaceae is confirmed for the quellkörper bearing taxa including the monotypic genera Biciliospora, Coronophorella, Neofracchiaea, Scortechiniella and Scortechiniellopsis, each represented by single collections. Tympanopsis is reinstated for T. confertula and T. uniseriata while Scortechinia is more narrowly circumscribed to include S. acanthostroma and the new species, S. diminuspora from Ecuador. Cryptosphaerella is accepted in Scortechiniaceae including six new species from Kenya and Costa Rica, C. celata, C. costaricensis, C. cylindriformis, C. elliptica, C. globosa, and C. malindensis. Spinulosphaeria is accepted in Coronophorales with uncertain family placement. The number of ascospores in the ascus is not phylogenetically useful in distinguishing genera within the order. The quellkörper continues to be an important character in defining the Scortechiniaceae, while taxa within the group show a mixture of morphological characteristics of varying phylogenetic importance. The presence of smooth versus spinulose subiculum aids in separating Tympanopsis and Scortechinia and erumpent ascomata distinguish Cryptosphaerella species. Taxa within the Bertiaceae vary along the lines of robust, tuberculate, collapsing ascomata and hyaline to pigmented, septate ascospores mostly larger than in other taxa in the order.
S2426	T. Orihara;F. Sawada;S. Ikeda;M. Yamato;C. Tanaka;N. Shimomura;M. Hashiya;K. Iwase	2010	Taxonomic reconsideration of a sequestrate fungus, Octaviania columellifera, with the proposal of a new genus, Heliogaster, and its phylogenetic relationships in the Boletales	Mycologia	102	1	108-121	10.3852/08-168			During taxonomic revision of the genus <I>Octaviania</I> in Japan, we examined herbarium and fresh specimens of <I>O. columellifera</I> and <I>O. asterosperma</I> sensu S. Yoshimi & Y. Doi using morphological and molecular techniques. These two species were identical in both macro- and micromorphological characters, and were clearly different from the generally known <I>O. asterosperma</I>. The identity of the two species and their distinctness from <I>O. asterosperma</I> was further supported by both nuclear large subunit and ITS rDNA phylogeny. The molecular analyses also revealed that <I>O. columellifera</I> shares its lineage with the boletoid mushroom-forming <I>Xerocomus chrysenteron</I> complex, and that it does not form a monophyletic clade with other <I>Octaviania</I> species. Our morphological reevaluation, including transmission electron microscopic observation of basidiospores, clarified the taxonomic boundary between <I>O. columellifera</I> and other Japanese <I>Octaviania</I> species. Accordingly, we propose a new genus, <I>Heliogaster</I>, for <I>O. columellifera</I> with designation of the lectotype. We discuss phylogenetic relationships with <I>Octaviania sensu stricto</I> species and the closely related boletoid (pileate-stipitate) fungi, generic characters of <I>Heliogaster</I>, and intraspecific phylogeny.
S2414	S. H. Wu;D. M. Wang;S. Y. Yu	2010	Neoaleurodiscus fujii, a new genus and new species found at the timberline in Japan	Mycologia	102	1	217-223	10.3852/09-052			A new genus Neoaleurodiscus, is proposed as a segregate from Aleurodiscus (Basidiomycota), and the new species Neoaleurodiscus fujii is described. It was collected in a timberline area of Mt Fuji, Japan. Specimens were found on trunks of Rhododendron sp. Morphological study and phylogenetic analysis based on sequence data derived from LSU nrDNA indicated that Neoaleurodiscus is separate from other segregate genera from Aleurodiscus s.l. Neoaleurodiscus is characterized by having a disciform basidiocarp; microscopically it has moniliform gloeocystidia, absence of acanthophyses, nodose-septate hyphae, hyphidia, and basidiospores, which are amyloid, smooth and ¡À thick-walled. Among genera studied, Acanthobasidium and Aleurodiscus (s.s.) are most closely related to Neoaleurodiscus, but these two genera have warted or spiny basidiospores. Two new combinations, Acanthobasidium penicillatum and Neoaleurodiscus monilifer, are proposed.
S2452	T. D. Bruns;L. C. Grubisha;J. M. Trappe;J. F. Kerekes;E. C. Vellinga	2010	Suillus quiescens, a new species commonly found in the spore bank in California and Oregon	Mycologia	102	2	438-446	10.3852/09-149			Suillus quiescens species nova is common under Pinus muricata on Santa Cruz and Santa Rosa Islands in the Northern Channel Islands of California, and we subsequently found it fruiting at Pt. Reyes National Seashore on the central coast of California. Sequences from the internal transcribed spacer region show that it is distinct from all 44 species of Suillus tested, and features of its morphology separate it from all other unsequenced species. Suillus quiescens has a broader distribution than Channel Islands and coastal California as it was also encountered as ectomycorrhizae on roots of pine seedlings from the eastern Sierra Nevada, coastal Oregon, and the Southern Cascade Mountains. The reason it has not been previously identified from these areas may be due to its resemblance to S. brevipes at maturity, or it may be a rare fruiter that persists in the spore bank
S2419	M. G. Otalora;G. Aragon;M. C. Molina;I. Martinez;F. Lutzoni	2010	Disentangling the Collema-Leptogium complex through a molecular phylogenetic study of the Collemataceae (Peltigerales, lichen-forming Ascomycota)	Mycologia	102	2	279-290	10.3852/09-114			The family Collemataceae (Peltigerales, Ascomycota) includes species of cyanolichens with foliose to fruticose or crustose thalli, with simple or septate ascospores. The current classification divides this family into two groups on the basis of ascospore types. The objective of this study was to evaluate the phylogenetic relationships within this family. Combined DNA sequence data from the nuclear large subunit and mitochondrial small subunit ribosomal RNA genes were used to evaluate monophyly of the family and the relationships between the largest genera of this family. The results revealed that this family is not monophyletic. The genera Staurolemma and Physma, currently classified within the Collemataceae, were found nested within the Pannariaceae. The second main result of this study confirms that the genera Collema and Leptogium, both part of the Collemataceae s. str., are not monophyletic and that the presence of a thallus cortex is not a synapomorphy for Leptogium. The main taxonomic conclusion is that the families Collemataceae and Pannariaceae were recircumscribed, in light of molecular findings, with the latter family now including Staurolemma and Physma. The genera Collema and Leptogium form a single mixed monophyletic group. Inferred ancestral character states within the Collema-Leptogium complex revealed that the ancestor of this family had a thallus without cortex and that a cortex evolved at least twice relatively early in the evolution of the Collemataceae s. str. These independent gains of a thallus cortex seems to be associated with a transition from colonizing bare rocks and soils in semi-arid and exposed habitats to epiphytism in shady humid forests.
S2495	F. Trouillas;J. Úrbez-Torres;W. D. Gubler	2010	Diversity of diatrypaceous fungi associated with grapevine canker diseases in California	Mycologia	102	2	319-336	10.3852/08-185			Eutypa lata is the most common diatrypaceous fungus in grapevine cankers. This study was undertaken to determine the presence and diversity of other members of the Diatrypaceae in grapevines in California. We isolated into pure culture 11 species of Diatrypaceae from the wood of diseased grapevines including Cryptosphaeria pullmanensis, Cryptovalsa ampelina, Diatrype oregonensis, D. stigma, D. whitmanensis, Diatrype sp, Diatrypella verrucaeformis and four putative species of Eutypella. Species were identified or grouped morphologically and by phylogenetic analyses of the complete sequence of the internal transcribed spacer (ITS) of the rDNA and &#946;-tubulin gene. Diatrypaceous fungi also occurred frequently on the native flora surrounding vineyards, thus serving as possible inoculum sources for these putative pathogens. &#13;&#10;
S2466	E. C. Vellinga;M. Contu;A. Vizzini	2010	Leucoagaricus decipiens and La. erythrophaeus, a new species pair in sect. Piloselli	Mycologia	102	2	447-454	10.3852/09-164			Leucoagaricus decipiens and La. erythrophaeus, are described as new from Sardinia, Italy and California, USA, respectively. These sister species show distinct reddening reactions when touched on all parts of the basidiocarps and darken on drying. Their collariate lamellae, broadly cylindrical to utriform cheilocystidia and trichodermal pileus covering distinguish them morphologically from other species in sect. Piloselli, while nrITS and EF1-a sequences distinguish them from each other. Leucoagaricus erythrophaeus has been known under the name Lepiota roseifolia, but the type collection of this species does not fit the interpretation.
S2516	K. Hirayama;K. Tanaka;H. A. Raja;A. N. Miller;C. A. Shearer	2010	A molecular phylogenetic assessment of Massarina ingoldiana sensu lato	Mycologia	102	3	729-746	10.3852/09-230			
S2490	A. Justo;I. Morgestern;H. E. Hallen-Adams;D. S. Hibbett	2010	Convergent evolution of sequestrate forms in Amanita under Mediterranean Climate conditions	Mycologia	102	3	675-688	10.3852/09-191			The systematic position of secotioid (Torrendia) and gasteroid (Amarrendia) forms within the agaricoid Amanita lineage (Agaricales, Basidiomycota) was studied using molecular (nLSU, ITS) data. Secotioid and gasteroid forms occur in four independent clades nested within agaricoid forms. One clade corresponds to the secotioid T. pulchella, from Southern Europe and North Africa. The others correspond to Torrendia and Amarrendia species from Australia. Mediterranean-type climatic conditions are postulated as a force driving the convergent evolution of these secotioid and at least one of the gasteroid forms in geographically distant areas. Species formerly placed in Torrendia and Amarrendia are transfered to Amanita. A new species of Torrendia from Australia was discovered during the revision of the collections originally identified as T. arenaria, and is here described as Amanita pseudoinculta.&#13;&#10;
S2537	E. C. Vellinga	2010	Lepiota in California, U.S.A. Species with a hymeniform pileus covering	Mycologia	102	3	664-674	10.3852/09-180			The eight Lepiota species with a hymeniform pileus covering that are known in California are presented and discussed. Lepiota phaeoderma without an annulus and with a very dark pileus surface that splits open into small patches around the umbo is described as new. Lepiota neophana, a species with an annulus and a closed brown pileus surface, and L. lilacea, with a conspicuous dark annulus, are both recorded for the first time west of the Rocky Mountains. The identity of L. neophana is reviewed and clarified. based on morphological and molecular data. The type collection of L. rufipes was studied and L. rufipes is put in the synonymy with Cystolepiota seminuda. A key to the species is given.
S2565	M. Binder;K. H. Larsson;P. B. Matheny;D. S. Hibbett	2010	Amylocorticiales ord. nov. and Jaapiales ord. nov.: early-diverging clades of Agaricomycetidae dominated by corticioid forms	Mycologia	102	4	865-880	10.3852/09-288			The Agaricomycetidae is one of the most morphologically diverse clades of Basidiomycota that includes the well-known Agaricales and Boletales, which are dominated by pileate-stipitate forms, and the more obscure Atheliales, which is a relatively small group of resupinate taxa. This study focuses taxon sampling on resupinate forms that may be related to these groups, aiming at resolving the early-branching clades in the major groups of Agaricomycetidae. The second goal was to resolve sister group relationships between Agaricales, Boletales, and Atheliales with confidence, a difficult task based on conflicting results concerning the placement of the Atheliales. To this end, we have developed a six-locus nuclear data set (nuc-ssu, nuc-lsu, 5.8S, rpb1, rpb2, and tef1) for 191 species, which was analyzed with maximum parsimony, maximum likelihood, and Bayesian methods. Our analyses of these data corroborate the view that the Boletales evolved from athelioid forms. We have also resolved an additional early-branching clade within the Agaricomycetidae that is composed primarily of resupinate forms, as well as a few morphologically more elaborate forms including Plicaturopsis and Podoserpula. This clade, which we describe here as the new order Amylocorticiales, is the sister group of the Agaricales. We introduce a second order, the Jaapiales, for the lone resupinate genus Jaapia consisting of two species only. The Jaapiales is supported as the sister group to the rest of the Agaricomycetidae, suggesting that the greatest radiation of pileate-stipitate mushrooms resulted from the elaboration of resupinate ancestors.
S2401	S. Masaphy;L. Zabari;D. Goldberg	2009	New long season ecotype of Morchella rufobrunnea from northern Israel	Mycologia Aplicada International	21	2	45-55				True morel ascocarps commonly appear in spring for a limited period of a few weeks over the world. There has been only one earlier report of a morel population, presumably mycorrhizal, persisting for several months at a single site from Israel. The present study describes a new pioneer type that fruited in northern Israel from early November to late May (winter and spring). The new ecotype, Morchella rufobrunnea (MS2-IL), was identified using the sequence of the nuclear ribosomal internal transcribed spacer and is reported for the first time out of the American Continent. Its population size was monitored from 2001 to 2006 and correlated with concurrently collected rainfall and temperature data. This constitutes the first report of a sighting of M. rufobrunnea in Israel and the second report describing long season morels anywhere in the world.
S732	G. F. Bills;J. D. Polishook;M. A. Goetz;R. F. Sullivan;J. F. White Jr	2002	Chaunopycnis pustulata sp. nov., a new clavicipitalean anamorph producing metabolites that modulate potassium ion channels	Mycological Progress	1	1	3-17	10.1007/s11557-006-0001-3			Two morphologically similar strains of hyphomycetous fungi, MF5785 and MF5638, produced potent indole diterpene antagonists of the calcium-gated potassium ion channel, Maxi-K, and a diterpene blocker (nalanthalide) of the voltage-gated potassium channel, Kv 1.3, respectively. The two strains were tentatively identified in the literature as Nalanthamala species. Analyses of their secondary metabolite profiles by HPLC and mass spectroscopy demonstrated that both produced a series of indole diterpenes, of which at least one was produced by both strains. Another strain, Chaunopycnis alba (MF6799), that produced the diterpene, nalanthalide, also produced indole diterpene metabolites. Morphological comparisons and phylogenetic studies based on 28S and ITS rDNA sequences indicated that MF5785 and MF5368, and another soil-derived strain GB6597, belonged to a monophyletic clade of the Clavicipitaceae that included the anamorph Chaunopycnis alba and several Cordyceps and Tolypocladium species. A new species of Chaunopycnis is therefore proposed to accommodate MF5785, MF5368, and GB6597. The possible synonymy of Albophoma yamanashiensis with C. alba also is discussed. Within the Clavicipitaceae, indole diterpenoid compounds have only been known from the graminicolous species (subfamily Clavicipitoideae); therefore delineation of a Chaunopycnis clade has revealed a previously unrecognized lineage of indole diterpene-producing fungi among the subfamily Cordycipitoideae.
S699	U. Eberhardt	2002	Molecular kinship analyses of the agaricoid Russulaceae: correspondence with mycorrhizal anatomy and sporocarp features in the genus Russula	Mycological Progress	1	2	201-223	10.1007/s11557-006-0019-6			A data set of LSU DNA sequences of mainly European Russula and Lactarius species was subjected to molecular phylogenetic analysis. Species could be allocated to six clades, with an unresolved phylogeny. One of these clades represents the genus Lactarius. The only analysed species of the section Archaeinae (Russula) was placed basal to both genera. Thus Lactarius appears to be derived from Russula. Russula was divided into four clusters, corresponding to the sections Plorantinae and Nigricantinae, subgenus Heterophyllidia including the section Foetentinae, and a cluster representing the remaining subgenera of the “Genuinae”. Even though the resulting groups can be considered as valid classificatory groups, species associations resulting from molecular analyses neither support the division of Russula into the subgenus Compacta (including the sections Nigricantinae, Plorantinae, and Archaeinae) and the “Genuinae” (including all remaining taxa), nor do they support previously proposed evolutionary lineages within the “Genuinae”. Ribosomal ITS DNA sequences of Russula species were analysed to achieve better infrageneric resolution. The results are discussed in relation to current classification systems and to what is known about the mycorrhizae formed by Russula species. While the systematic value attached to many macroscopic and microscopic sporocarp features was not supported by sequence data, mycorrhizal anatomy is in good correspondence with many of the results from the phylogenetic analysis. 
S748	A. M. Gottlieb;J. E. Wright;J. M. Moncalvo	2002	Inonotus s. l. in Argentina- morphology, cultural characters and molecular analyses	Mycological Progress	1	3	299-313	10.1007/s11557-006-0028-5			A survey of the hymenochaetaceous Inonotus in Argentina was conducted. At least seven Inonotus sensu stricto species were recorded for the region. These are I. ochroporus, I. patouillardii, I. pertenuis, I. quercustris, I. rickii, I. serranus and I. texanus. A detailed description of each species is given, and a key for their identification is provided. Each morphospecies could also be distinguished from both RFLPs and sequence data obtained from PCR products of the internal transcribed spacer region of the nuclear ribosomal RNA gene (ITS). A high level of nucleotide sequence variation was found among Inonotus. Molecular data also indicate that one morphospecies, I. patouillardii, may in fact represent two distinct species. Both cultural and molecular data support the view that Ptychogaster cubensis represents an anamorphic state of I. rickii. Two new combinations are proposed, namely Phellinus crustosus and Inocutis jamaicensis. I. pertenuis is reported for the first time from Argentina.
S671	U. Kõljalg;H. Tammi;S. Timonen;R. Agerer;R. Sen	2002	ITS rDNA sequence-based phylogenetic analysis of Tomentellopsis species from boreal and temperate forests, and the identification of the pink-type ectomycorrhizas	Mycological Progress	1	1	81-92	10.1007/s11557-006-0007-x			Fungi in the genus Tomentellopsis were subjected to molecular phylogenetic analyses in order to clarify species-level relationships and mycorrhiza-forming ability with coniferous and deciduous trees. Fungal nucleotide sequence data from the internal transcribed spacer of nuclear ribosomal DNA (ITS rDNA) region were obtained from fruitbodies, ectomycorrhiza and pure cultures. Maximum parsimony (MP), distance (neighbor joining, NJ) and maximum likelihood (ML) analyses of aligned ITS sequences highlighted three clades designated T. echinospora, T. submollis and T. bresadoliana. Sporocarp tissue and ectomycorrhizas, or isolated mycelia, previously described as Pinirhiza rosea, Piceirhiza rosea or Pink were clearly identified in a strongly supported T. submollis clade. Host-linked population variation in this clade was also noted that may reflect active speciation activity. A fungus isolated from Beige-type mycorrhizas formed on Scots pine seedlings appeared in the paraphyletic T. echinospora clade which included sequences showing greater divergence. The data provide a primary classification of Tomentellopsis species that is urgently needed in assessment of the importance of resupinate thelephoroid fungi in mycorrhizal communities associated with trees in coniferous and deciduous forest ecosystems.
S667	H. T. Lumbsch;N. Wirtz;R. Lindemuth;I. Schmitt	2002	Higher level phylogenetic relationships of Euascomycetes (Pezizomycotina) inferred from a combined analysis of nuclear and mitochondrial sequence data	Mycological Progress	1	1	57-70	10.1007/s11557-006-0005-z			A combined data set of nuclear SSU rDNA, LSU rDNA, and mitochondrial SSU rDNA sequences was analyzed in order to examine the relationships of the major clades of euascomycetes. Partial sequences of 14 ascomycetes were determined and aligned with the corresponding sequences of 16 other ascomycetes retrieved from Genbank. The alignment was analyzed using maximum parsimony (MP) and a Bayesian analysis with Markov chain Monte Carlo (B/MCMC). The classification based on single-gene studies is supported, but the confidence is enhanced in the concatenated analysis. The monophyly of the superclass Leotiomyceta, which includes all euascomycetes with inoperculate asci, is strongly supported. The polyphyly of ascolocularous fungi is supported. The group is divided into two groups: the Dothideomycetes basal to all other Leotiomyceta and the Chaetothyriomycetes as sister-group to Eurotiomycetes. The Lecanoromycetes appear as a monophyletic group with strong support and form a sister-group to the Chaetothyriomycetes/Eurotiomycetes clade, but this lacks support. The Leotiomycetes and Sordariomycetes form a strongly supported sister-group. Alternative topologies are tested using parametric bootstrapping; a basal position of the Eurotiomycetes and Leotiomycetes in the Leotiomyceta cannot be rejected, while such a position can be rejected for Chaetothyriomycetes, Lecanoromycetes and Sordariomycetes. The character evolution with regard to ascoma type, ascus type and ascoma-ontogeny is examined using MP and maximum likelihood (ML). While it appears most likely that the ancestor of the inoperculate ascomycetes had apothecia and an ascohymenial ascoma-ontogeny using MP methods, the ML approach shows that there is some uncertainty at the current state of knowledge. The improvement of confidence of the combined data set in comparison with single-gene studies makes us confident that analyses with additional data sets will further improve the confidence and eventually uncover the branching order of euascomycetes.
S858	T. Oda;T. Yamazaki;C. Tanaka;T. Terashita;N. Taniguchi;M. Tsuda	2002	Amanita ibotengutake sp. nov., a poisonous fungi from Japan	Mycological Progress	1	4	355-365	10.1007/s11557-006-0032-9			On the basis of molecular phylogeny, it is clear that the fungi treated as Amanita pantherina in Japan are confused, i.e., A. pantherina and a misidentified species. As for morphology, the misidentified species differs from A. pantherina by having clamp connections on hyphae and basidia, a larger-sized fruitbody, ascending volval rings of stipe base and deciduous annulus. It is clear that the misidentified species is a poisonous fungus containing ibotenic acid and muscimol and causes the Pantherina syndrome. On these characters, it is concluded that the misidentified species is the unexplored Amanita species treated under the Japanese name ‘ibotengutake’ after which ibotenic acid was named. Here, we described it as a new species Amanita ibotengutake.
S872	U. Braun;P. W. Crous;F. Dugan;J. Z. Groenewald;G. S. De Hoog	2003	Phylogeny and taxonomy of Cladosporium-like hyphomycetes, including Davidiella gen. nov., the teleomorph of Cladosporium s. str	Mycological Progress							A phylogenetic study employing sequence data from the internal transcribed spacers (ITS1, ITS2) and 5.8S gene, as well as the 18S rRNA gene of various Cladosporium-like hyphomycetes revealed Cladosporium s. lat. to be heterogeneous. The genus Cladosporium s. str. was shown to represent a sister clade to Mycosphaerella s. str., for which the teleomorph genus Davidiella is proposed. The morphology, phylogeny and taxonomy of the cladosporioid fungi are discussed on the basis of this phylogeny, which consists of several clades representing Cladosporium-like genera. Cladosporium is confined to Davidiella (Mycosphaerellaceae) anamorphs with coronate conidiogenous loci and conidial hila. Pseudocladosporium is confined to anamorphs of Caproventuria (Venturiaceae). Cladosporium-like anamorphs of the Venturia (conidia catenate) are referred to Fusicladium. Human-pathogenic Cladosporium species belong in Cladophialophora (Capronia, Herpotrichiellaceae) and Cladosporium fulvum is representative of the Mycosphaerella/Passalora clade (Mycosphaerellaceae). Cladosporium malorum proved to provide the correct epithet for Pseudocladosporium kellermanianum (syn. Phaeoramularia kellermaniana, Cladophialophora kellermaniana) as well as Cladosporium porophorum. Based on differences in conidiogenesis and the structure of the conidiogenous loci, further supported by molecular data, C. malorum is allocated to Alternaria.
S933	V. Mel'nik;S. Lee;J. Z. Groenewald;P. W. Crous	2003	New hyphomycetes from Restionaceae in fynbos: Parasarcopodium ceratocaryi gen. et sp. nov., and Rhexodenticula fusispora sp. nov	Mycological Progress							Two new hyphomycetes were isolated from Restionaceae in the fynbos of the Cape Floral Kingdom of South Africa: Parasarcopodium ceratocaryi gen. et sp. nov. on Ceratocaryum decipiens, and Rhexodenticula fusispora sp. nov. on Elegia capensis. The morphological characteristics of both taxa are described, and contrasted to other morphologically similar fungi. To elucidate the phylogenetic relationships of Parasarcopodium, partial small subunit rDNA sequences (18S) were generated from the ex-type strain, which revealed it to be a member of the Hypocreales.
S864	J. Nechwatal;W. F. Osswald	2003	Pythium montanum sp. nov., a new species from a spruce stand in the Bavarian Alps	Mycological Progress	2						During a study on soilborne Pythiaceae in the Bavarian Alps, 3 isolates of a papillate Pythium species with aplerotic oospores were found in rhizosphere soil from a declining spruce stand. The isolates showed a unique combination of sporangial and gametangial characters, and could not be assigned to any known species of the genus. The isolates are characterised by a relatively low growth rate, internally proliferating sporangia and extremely variable, monoclinous, sessile or shortly stalked antheridia. Direct germination of sporangia frequently occurs in liquid culture. Internal transcribed spacer (ITS) regions of the ribosomal DNA show very low levels of similarity to those of all known species of Pythium. This paper describes the isolates as Pythium montanum sp. nov., gives details on its morphology and provides preliminary information on its pathogenicity. Additional molecular evidence for its status as a new species is also provided. Phylogenetic analyses with a set of Pythium spp. show that P. montanum groups in a clade together with P. vexans, a species whose taxonomical status still remains unclear, and that is considered a ëborder species' between Pythium and Phytophthora.
S959	D. E. Tuthill	2003	Genetic variation and recombination in Penicillium miczynskii and Eupenicillium species	Mycological Progress							Reproduction in the genus Penicillium is thought to be completely asexual. Sexual reproduction, as occurs in the related genus Eupenicillium, is thought to provide evolutionary benefits because it allows for new combinations of alleles and therefore increases the amount of variation within the species. This hypothesis was tested using inter-simple sequence repeats (ISSRs) to assess the amount of intraspecific and intra-population variation within Penicillium miczynskii and the closely related Eupenicillium shearii. The data for both genera were also used to test for clonal reproduction against the null hypothesis of panmixis, using measures of genotypic diversity, linkage disequilibrium and phylogenetic tree length. The ISSR fingerprints indicated that the 70 Eupenicillium strains actually included two distinct species, Eupenicillium shearii and Eupenicillium tropicum sp. nov., each represented by populations in both Costa Rica and India. While none of the species or populations were found to be randomly recombining, the relative strength of the clonal component differed among the species. Penicillium miczynskii had the smallest clonal component, with the highest genotypic diversity, lowest Index of Association, 40% of alleles non-randomly associated, and phylogenetic tree length closer to that of recombined data sets than to the minimum possible. Eupenicillium tropicum showed nearly complete clonal reproduction with the lowest genotypic diversity and 100% of alleles non-randomly associated in both populations. On the other hand, it also had the greatest amount of intraspecific variation, with as little as 38% similarity among strains. The results indicate that Penicillium species may, on rare occasion, genetically recombine; the regular occurrence of meiosis in the life cycle of Eupenicillium species does not facilitate recombination; And the greatest amount of genetic variation was not associated with recombination, but with clonal propagation.
S957	D. E. Tuthill;J. C. Frisvad	2003	A new species from tropical soil, Eupenicillium tropicum	Mycological Progress							Forty-three strains of Eupenicillium tropicum sp. nov. were isolated from soils collected in India and Costa Rica. The species is characterized by biverticillate penicilli, slightly rough, subglobose to ovate conidia, brownish cleistothecia that become brown-gray with age, and ascospores with two equatorial flanges and slightly roughened valves. All strains produced a large number of indole alkaloids and the uncharacterized metabolites emon-1088, HOLOX and isom1, while aflo, gx, RAIMO and STOT were produced by a majority of strains. Eupenicillium tropicum is morphologically most similar to E. shearii, but based on ITS-LSU sequences, is most closely related to Penicillium citrinum, P. sartoryi and P. westlingii.
S1148	C. Douanla-Meli;E. Langer;F. D. Calonge	2004	Geastrum pleosporus sp. nov., a new species of Geastraceae identified based on morphological and molecular phylogenetic data from Cameroon	Mycological Progress							An unusual species of Geastrum was found growing on decayed wood debris and leaves of Triplochiton scleroxylon in the Mbalmayo Forest Reserve, Cameroon. The species morphologically resembles G. saccatum and G. fimbriatum in having sessile endosperidium partly enclosed by the saccate base of the exoperidium. Microscopically, it is characterized by and distinguished from all other known species of the genus, in having subsmooth, punctate to moderately verruculose, slightly thick- to distinctly thick-walled polymorphous basidiospores, deeply constricted to eight-shaped, mostly oblong, ovoid, cylindrical, elliptic, reniform to club-shaped. G. pleosporus was studied from a collection of about fifteen basidiomata covering different stages of development. It is described as new based on morphological analyses and phylogenetic inferences made from large ribosomal DNA sequence alignments. Phylogenetic relationship of G. pleosporus was investigated, in parsimony analyses of partial sequences of the large subunit rDNA of selected Gasteromycetes species, G. pleosporus is closely related to G. saccatum within the strongly supported clade of Geastrum species. The monophyly of G. pleosporus and G. saccatum is well supported in parsimony analysis of dataset of Geastrum and related taxa using parsimony analysis and maximum likelihood.
S1541	M. Goeker;A. Riethmueller;H. Voglmayr;M. Weiss;F. Oberwinkler	2004	Phylogeny of Hyaloperonospora based on nuclear ribosomal internal transcribed spacer sequences	Mycological Progress	3		83-94				Phylogenetic relationships in Hyaloperonospora (Oomycetes) were investigated by molecular analyses using internal transcribed spacer (ITS) sequences and collections from different host plants. Trees were inferred with Bayesian Markov chain Monte Carlo, neighbor-joining and maximum parsimony methods and rooted with Perofascia. The results are discussed with respect to host taxonomy and species concepts of downy mildews from the literature. Molecular data mainly support the use of narrow species delimitations and host range as a taxonomic marker. Hyaloperonospora brassicae turns out to be a non-monophyletic assemblage of different species. New combinations are proposed in accordance with the phylogenetic trees.
S1025	D. Krueger;K. W. Hughes;R. H. Petersen	2004	The tropical Polyporus tricholoma (Polyporaceae) € taxonomy, phylogeny, and the development of methods to detect cryptic species	Mycological Progress							The stipitate pore-bearing fungus Polyporus tricholoma (Polyporus infrageneric group Polyporellus) is commonly reported from Mesoamerica and more rarely from the palaeotropics. Collections from Puerto Rico, Mexico, and Costa Rica did not differ morphologically, but their monokaryotic cultures revealed the existence of three interINcompatibility groups. These putative cryptic species exist sympatrically in Costa Rica. Sequencing, restriction enzyme digestion, and specific primers targeting the ITS region of nuclear ribosomal DNA (ITS I - 5.8S - ITS II) could only partly be used for detecting intercompatibility groups. Heterogeneity within the rDNA repeat was observed. Molecular evidence supports the existence of a close relative in Australia.
S1011	K. Wells;R. J. Bandoni;S. R. Lim;M. L. Berbee	2004	Observations on Some Species of Myxarium and Reconsideration of the Auriculariaceae and Hyaloriaceae (Auriculariales)	Mycological Progress							A new species of Myxarium is described and an extended description of M. nucleatum is presented based on collections from North and South America and one collection from England. Sequencing data for eight collections of the Auriculariales are recorded. Morphological characters and sequence analysis are used to re-evaluate the Auriculariaceae, Exidiaceae and Hyaloriaceae resulting in the reduction of the family Exidiaceae to a synonym of Auriculariaceae and the restriction of the Hyaloriaceae provisionally to the genus Myxarium and the gasteroid Hyaloria pilacre.
S1171	G. F. Bills;J. Collado;C. Ruibal;F. Peláez;G. Platas	2005	Hormonema carpetanum, sp. nov., a new lineage of dothideaceous black yeasts from Spain	Mycological Progress							Strains of an unnamed Hormonema species were collected from living and decaying leaves of Juniperus species, plant litter, and rock surfaces in Spain. Strains were recognized and selected based on their antifungal activity caused by the triterpene glycoside, enfumafungin, or based on morphological characteristics and ITS1-5.8S-ITS2 rDNA (ITS) sequence data. Examination of 13 strains from 8 different sites demonstrated that they share a common set of morphological features. The strains have identical or nearly identical sequences of rDNA from ITS regions. Phylogenetic analyses of ITS region and intron-containg actin gene sequences demonstrated that these strains comprised a lineage closely allied to, but distinct from, Hormonema dematioides, and other dothideaceous ascomycetes with Hormonema anamorphs. Therefore, a new species, Hormonema carpetanum, is proposed and illustrated. The strains form a pycnidial synanamorph that resembles the coelomycete genus Sclerophoma in agar culture and on sterilized juniper leaves.
S1360	P. B. Matheny;N. L. Bougher	2005	The new genus Auritella from Africa and Australia (Inocybaceae, Agaricales): molecular systematics, taxonomy and historical biogeography	Mycological Progress							Recent phylogenetic evidence strongly supports a monophyletic group of Afro-Australian agaricoid and sequestrate species with phenotypic affinities to the genus Inocybe (Agaricales, Basidiomycota). Here this clade is proposed as the new genus Auritella. Seven species are fully documented with taxonomic descriptions and illustrations, four of which are described as new. A key to genera and major clades of the Inocybaceae and a key to species of Auritella are provided. A maximum likelihood tree using rpb2 and nLSU-rDNA nucleotide sequences depicts the phylogenetic relationships of five of the seven species of the genus, of which the Australian taxa form a monophyletic group. An ancient split between Australian and African lineages is hypothesized using a molecular clock that dates back at least to the late Cretaceous (about 86 Ma). Diversification of Australian species of Auritella is estimated to have first occurred in the early Tertiary (about 60 Ma).
S1645	U. Braun;S. Takamatsu;V. Heluta;S. Limkaisang;R. Divarangkoon;R. Cook;H. Boyle	2006	Phylogeny and taxonomy of powdery mildew fungi of Erysiphe sect. Uncinula on Carpinus species	Mycological Progress	5		139-153	10.1007/s11557-006-0509-6			A phylogenetic analysis of the Erysiphe with uncinuloid ascoma appendages (Erysiphe section Uncinula, Erysiphales, Ascomycota) on Carpinus spp. has been done using sequences of the rDNA ITS regions and the D1/D2 domains of the 28S rDNA.These results combined with morphological data revealed a complex consisting of several separate taxa. These included the existing Erysiphe carpinicola on Carpinus japonica distinguishable from the Erysiphe sp. on C. betulus and C. tschonoskii as well as the one on C. laxiflora. Thus, it was shown that Oidium carpini, described from Europe on Carpinus betulus, and a powdery mildew with uncinula-like ascomata, recently found in Europe on this host, and an Erysiphe on C. tschonoskii in Japan, described previously as E. carpinicola, all belonged to a single new species, here named E. arcuata in this paper. As the powdery mildew on C. laxiflora was also distinct from other known species, it is named E. carpini-laxiflorae in this paper. The a;ready described E. pseudocarpinicola nad Erysiphe sp. on Carpinus cordata are two additional taxa, which are morphologically and genetically distinguished from the other species of Erysiphe sect. Uncinula on Carpinus spp.
S1497	N. Ohtaka;K. Narisawa	2006	Molecular characterization and endophytic nature of the root-associated fungus Meliniomyces variabilis (LtVB3), a potential new biocontrol agent for soil-borne diseases	Mycological Progress							The root-associated fungus LtVB3 was formerly reported as a potential new biocontrol agent of Verticillium yellows in Chinese cabbage and Fusarium wilt of Tomato. According to molecular phylogenetic analysis of the ITS 1-5.8S-ITS 2 rDNA regions and morphological characteristics, LtVB3 was identified as Meliniomyces variabilis, which is a recently described species (formerly called "Variable White Taxon", or VWT). In vitro inoculation experiments showed that the fungus can colonize endophytically the roots of torch azalea and eucalyptus. The hyphae formed typical structures of ericoid mycorrhizas within root epidermal cells of azalea but did not produce any typical ectomycorrhizal structures with or within root cells of eucalyptus. Meliniomyces variabilis are probably diverse in nature but may be preferred to colonize roots of plants belonging to ericaceous plant families.
S1700	D. Redecker;P. Raab;F. Oehl;F. J. Camacho;R. Courtecuisse	2007	A novel clade of sporocarp-forming species of glomeromycotan fungi in the Diversisporales lineage	Mycological Progress							In the early times of taxonomy of arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi (Glomeromycota), exclusively sporocarpic species were described. Since then the focus has mainly shifted to species forming spores singly. For many of the sporocarpic species, no molecular data have been made available and their phylogenetic position has remained unclear. We obtained small subunit ribosomal rDNA and Internal Transcribed Spacer data from specimens of glomeromycotan sporocarps from tropical areas that were assigned to three morphospecies. The complete sequence of the 18S small rDNA subunit sequence, Internal Transcribed Spacers 1 and 2 and 5.8S rDNA subunit was determined from a sporocarp of Glomus fulvum. Partial sequences of the small subunit and the other regions were obtained from Glomus pulvinatum and the newly-described species Glomus megalocarpum. Molecular phylogenetic analyses placed all species analyzed as a monophyletic sister group to the Diversispora spurca/Glomus versiforme clade group ("Glomus group C") within the Diversisporales. The phylogenetic divergence from other known species suggests that this clade may constitute a new genus. These findings will have important consequences for taxon definition in the Diversisporales. They will facilitate identification of these fungi using rDNA sequences within colonized roots or the environment.
S2220	T. Niskanen;K. Liimatainen;I. Kytövuori	2008	Two new species in Cortinarius subgenus Telamonia, Cortinarius brunneifolius and C. leiocastaneus, from Fennoscandia (Basidiomycota, Agaricales)	Mycological Progress	7		239-247	10.1007/s11557-008-0565-1			Two new Cortinarius species, C. brunneifolius and C. leiocastaneus, are described based on molecular and morphological data. Cortinarius brunneifolius looks like a trivial brown Telamonia. It is characterised by the fairly dark brown cap and gills contrast with the white stem. The major distinctive features are the refracting, colourless granules in the epicutis hyphae, broadly ellipsoid, equally verrucose spores, and fruitbody without bluish tints. Cortinarius leiocastaneus can be fairly easily recognised by the appearance of miniature brown Telamonia species, narrowly amygdaloid spores, and a habitat with Betula. Detailed descriptions of the species are provided as well as comparisons to macro- and microscopically similar existing telamonioid taxa. Phylogenetic relationships within the genus were studied by use of ITS rDNA sequence data. Ten new ITS sequences are published. Cortinarius brunneifolius and C. leiocastaneus are fairly closely related and belong to the subgenus Telamonia sensu stricto. The infrasubgeneric relationships were not well resolved, but the new species seem to be unrelated to the macroscopically similar species and do not clearly belong to any of the existing sections.
S2185	F. Runa;M. S. Park;B. M. Pryor	2008	Ulocladium systematics revisited: phylogeny and taxonomic status	Mycological Progress							The genus Ulocladium represents phaeodictyosporic Hyphomycetes that produce conidia essentially obovoid in shape. Earlier molecular studies that included 5 Ulocladium species and related taxa in Alternaria, Embellisia, and Stemphylium revealed conflict between morphology and phylogeny, and Ulocladium was supported as polyphyletic with a paraphyletic core group. In the present study, 13 Ulocladium species were included for a more comprehensive systematic analysis of the genus based upon morphological and molecular characteristics. Total genomic DNA was extracted from Ulocladium species and sequences were determined for the nuclear internal transcribed spacer region including the 5.8S rDNA gene and the protein-coding genes glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase and Alt a1. Subsequent phylogenetic analyses based on maximum parsimony and Bayesian methods included related Alternaria, Embellisia, and Stemphylium spp. Results supported previous findings of polyphyletic and paraphyletic relationships of Ulocladium among other taxa. Ten Ulocladium species clustered into a core Ulocladium clade and all taxa possessed the key diagnostic feature of Ulocladium, namely, conidia essentially obovoid in shape. However, A. cheiranthi and E. indefessa also clustered within this group with high bootstrap support but did not posses this diagnostic feature. This paraphyletic clade resolved basal to the core Alternaria clade with high bootstrap support, unlike previous studies in which its position was imbedded within the primary Alternaria clade. Thus, status of the genus as an independent lineage and unique taxon is supported. As previously reported, U. alternariae and U. oudemansii, which posses the key conidium characteristics of Ulocladium, clustered as a separate clade sister to the core monophyletic clade. Further studies are necessary to determine if these taxa represent an independent lineage or share a common ancestor with the core Ulocladium clade. Obovoid conidia were poorly represented in the isolate of U. lanuginosum that was included in these analyses (originally identified as A. malvae), and the isolate resolved as A. radicina based upon all 3 loci sequenced. Based upon these data and the origin of the isolate, a reassessment of its identity is supported.
S2292	K. Sotome;T. Hattori;Y. Ota;S. S. Lee;S. Vikineswary;N. Abdullah;M. Kakishima	2009	Taxonomic study of Asian species of Echinochaete (Polyporaceae, Basidiomycota) and description of E. maximipora sp. nov	Mycological Progress	8	2	123-132	10.1007/s11557-009-0584-6			We carried out a taxonomic investigation on Echinochaete species collected from Japan and Malaysia using molecular phylogenetic analysis and morphological observations. Phylogenetic trees based on the LSU and ITS regions detected three main clades among the Echinochaete collections used in this study. The morphology of the type specimen E. russiceps falls within the range of those in one of the detected clade, and we concluded that this name represents the clade. Echinochaete russiceps is characterized by aculeate to lanceolate setoid elements with lateral spines on the pileus surface, but was found to have variable pore size and pileus surface colour. Another detected clade was represented by E. brachypora. The morphology of the specimens in the residual clade is clearly distinct from the other known species in Echinochaete and we described it as E. maximipora sp. nov. This species is characterized by the larger and elongated pores [(1)2 4 (0.5)1 2 mm], cylindrical setoid elements with lateral spines on the pileus surface and the narrower basidiospores. We provide detailed descriptions of Echinochaete species in Asia and an identification key to the species of Echinochaete.
S2288	C. To-anun;J. Nguenhom;J. Meeboon;I. Hidayat	2009	Two fungi associated with necrotic leaflets of areca palms (Areca catechu)	Mycological Progress	8	2	115-121	10.1007/s11557-009-0583-7			Information on fungi associated with necrotic leaflets of exotic palms in Thailand is scanty as previous studies were mainly focused on decaying fronds. This study provides some information regarding fungi associated with necrotic leaflets of exotic palms in Thailand. Specimens in this work were collected from several locations in Chiang Mai province, including natural and planted areas. One new species, Cercospora arecacearum from areca palm (Areca catechu), is described and illustrated. ITS sequence data analysis confirms the separation of the new Cercospora species from related taxa. Another species, Neorehmia arecae, hitherto known from areca palm, is newly recorded for Thailand and from a new host palm, Wallichia siamensis.
S2358	Y. J. Choi;H. D. Shin;M. Thines	2009	The host range of Albugo candida extends from Brassicaceae through Cleomaceae to Capparaceae	Mycological Progress	8	4	329-335	10.1007/s11557-009-0604-6			Capers (Capparis spinosa) are affected by white blister rust that has commonly been attributed to Albugo capparidis or to Albugo candida, based on a broad species concept for these organisms. Within the past three years, a great diversity within Albugo causing white blister disease to Brassicaceae has been observed, leading to the description of two new, specialized species within the parasites of Brassicaceae and the confirmation that Albugo lepidii is distinct from Albugo candida. In addition, it has been realized that Albugo candida has a broad host spectrum within the Brassicaceae, extending to the closely related Cleomaceae. Through molecular phylogenetic analysis of cox2 sequences and morphological comparison, it is demonstrated that the host range of this species in fact reaches to Capparaceae. These findings are both relevant for practical plant pathology and raise questions regarding the mechanisms involved in the exceptional broad host range in Albugo candida, compared to the other species so far investigated.
S2440	V. Heluta;S. Takamatsu;S. Voytyuk;Y. Shiroya	2009	Erysiphe kenjiana (Erysiphales), a new invasive fungus in Europe	Mycological Progress	8	4	367-375	10.1007/s11557-009-0610-8			An Asian powdery mildew fungus Erysiphe (Uncinula) kenjiana (Erysiphales, Ascomycota) has been found in Ukraine. This is the first record of this fungus in Europe. In 2007, E. kenjiana was collected on four Ulmus species in Kiev. All locations adjoined railways or an airport. Development of E. kenjiana was epiphytotic. This species was not found on elms surveyed at towns situated north-east, east or south of Kiev. The fungus may have been brought directly to Ukraine by rail or air transport. In 2008, the fungus was also collected in Chernihiv situated north-east of Kiev. It is likely that E. kenjiana will spread over all Ukraine and into countries of central and western Europe in 2009 or later. Molecular phylogenetic analyses using D1/D2 domains of the 28 S rDNA and ITS sequences revealed that the Ulmaceae-Cannabaceae-parasitic powdery mildews, including E. kenjiana, form a clade with strong supports, suggesting that these species diverged from a single ancestor and expanded their host ranges within the Ulmaceae and allied Cannabaceae. This hypothesis is supported by these species sharing the unique morphology of enlarged apices on their chasmothecial appendages. These fungi formed part of a larger grouping with species on Fagaceae, Nothofagaceae, Rosaceae, and Sapindaceae with strong statistical supports. These results suggest that Uncinula-like powdery mildew fungi on these plant families exhibit close evolutionary relationships with their hosts.
S3x30x98c18c49c36	D. S. Hibbett;K. Hansen;M. J. Donoghue	1998	Phylogeny and biogeography of Lentinula inferred from an expanded rDNA dataset	Mycological Research	102	9	1041-1049	10.1017/S0953756297005996			Phylogeny and biogeography of Lentinula, which includes cultivated shiitake mushrooms, were investigated using parsimony analyses of an expanded nuclear ribosomal DNA dataset. Lentinula occurs in the New World as well as Asia and Australasia. The Asian-Australasian Lentinula populations appear to form a clade, but species limits within this group are controversial. We refer to the entire Asian-Australasian Lentinula clade as shiitake. Thirty-seven wild-collected isolates of shiitake were examined, representing Australia, Borneo, China, Japan, Korea, Nepal, New Zealand, Papua New Guinea (PNG), Tasmania and Thailand. Five isolates of the New World species, L. boryana, were included for rooting purposes. Levels of sequence divergence between North and Central American L. boryana isolates are higher than those between the most divergent shiitake isolates. In shiitake, five independent lineages of rDNA were identified which we call groups I-V, but relationships among these lineages are not well resolved. Group I includes populations from northeast Asia to the South Pacific. Group II includes populations from PNG, Australia and Tasmania. Group III is limited to New Zealand. Group IV is from PNG. Finally, group V is from eastem China and Nepal. The distribution of rDNA lineages suggests a complex biogeographic history. Although many areas remain unsampled, our results suggest that certain areas have particularly high levels of diversity and should be targeted for further study and conservation.
S474	E. L. Stewart;Z. Liu;P. W. Crous;L. J. Szabo	1999	Phylogenetic relationships among some cercosporoid anamorphs of Mycosphaerella based on rDNA sequence analysis	Mycological Research	103	11	1491-1499	10.1017/S0953756299008680			Partial rDNA sequences were obtained from 26 isolates representing species of Cercospora, Passalora, Paracercospora, Pseudocercospora, Ramulispora, Pseudocercosporella, and Mycocentrospora. The combined internal transcribed spacers (ITS) including the 5.8S rRNA gene and 5' end of the 25S gene (primer pairs F63/R635) on rDNA were amplified using PCR and sequenced directly. The ITS regions including the 5.8S varied in length from 502 to 595 bp. The F63/R635 region varied from 509-519 bp among isolates sequenced. Reconstructed phylogenies inferred from both regions had highly similar topologies for the taxa examined. Phylogenetic analysis of the sequences resulted in four well-supported clades corresponding to Cercospora, Paracercospora/Pseudocercospora, Passalora and Ramulispora, with bootstrap values greater than 92% for each clade. Based on the results of the analysis, a new combination for Pseudocersporella aestiva is proposed in Ramulispora, and Paracercospora is reduced to synonymy with Pseudocercospora.
S386	F. Driver;R. J. Milner;J. W. H. Trueman	2000	A taxonomic revision of Metarhizium based on a phylogenetic analysis of ribosomal DNA sequence data	Mycological Research	104	2	134-150	10.1017/S0953756299001756			The taxonomy of Metarhizium has been reassessed based on sequence data and RAPD patterns from 123 isolates recognised as M. anisopliae, M. flavoviride or M. album. A high level of genetic diversity was found which was best resolved at the species/variety level by sequence data from the ITS and 28s rDNA D3 regions. RAPD patterns correlated closely with the sequence data and revealed a much greater degree of diversity useful for distinguishing strains within a variety. Ten distinct clades were revealed by the cladogram based on the combined sequence data set. Several major evolutionary lines were revealed, however the taxonomic relationships at the base of the tree are poorly resolved. The data support the monophyly of the M. anisopliae group, and recognise 4 clades within this group. Two of these correspond with M. anisopliae var. anisopliae and M. anisopliae var. majus. The other two are described as new varieties based on their distinctive ITS sequence data: M. anisopliae var. lepidiotum Driver & Milner and M. anisopliae var. acridum Driver & Milner. M. album, M. flavoviride var. flavoviride and M. flavoviride var. minus are recognised and redefined according to ITS sequence data. Three clades represent new varieties, two of which have been named M. flavoviride var. novazealandicum Driver & Milner and M. flavoviride var. pemphigum Driver & Milner based on their distinct ITS sequence data. A third clade contains only 2 disparate isolates and so has not been named pending further data on other similar isolates. A list of representative isolates is provided to be used as standards or type material so that unknown isolates can be assigned to the correct clade.
S477	B. M. Pryor;R. L. Gilbertson	2000	Molecular phylogenetic relationships amongst Alternaria species and related fungi based upon analysis of nuclear ITS and mt SSU rDNA sequences	Mycological Research	104	11	1312–1321	10.1017/S0953756200003002			To elucidate relationships among Alternaria, Ulocladium, and Stemphylium species, nuclear internal transcribed spacer (ITS) and mitochondrial small subunit (SSU) ribosomal DNA (rDNA) sequences from 18 Alternaria, four Ulocladium and four Stemphylium spp. were determined and compared. Phylogenetic analysis of the ITS and SSU rDNA sequences, performed by the neighbour joining and maximum parsimony methods, revealed that the Stemphylium spp. were phylogenetically distinct from the Alternaria and Ulocladium spp. Most Alternaria spp. and the Ulocladium spp. were placed together in a large Alternaria/Ulocladium clade. Within this large clade, the Alternaria spp. clustered into several distinct species-clades, most of which correlated with species-groups previously established based upon morphological characteristics. The Ulocladium spp. were placed into two species-clades, each of which also included Alternaria spp. A. longissima was distantly related to the other Alternaria spp., as well as the Ulocladium and Stemphylium spp. Based upon ITS and nuclear 18S rDNA sequence identities, A. longissima was most closely related to Leptosphaeria.
S504	D. K. Aanen;T. W. Kuyper;R. F. Hoekstra	2001	A widely distributed ITS polymorphism within a biological species of the ectomycorrhizal fungus Hebeloma velutipes	Mycological Research	105	3	284-290	10.1017/S0953756201003628			The ectomycorrhizal fungus Hebeloma velutipes consists of two biological species (BSP 16 and 17). Within BSP 17 a dikaryon was found with two divergent types of the ribosomal Internal Transcribed Spacer (ITS1 and 2). The two ITS types segregated in monokaryotic progeny of that dikaryon, showing that these different ITS types represent different alleles at homologous rDNA loci in the two nuclei. RFLP analysis of a number of strains of BSP 17 showed that the polymorphism is widespread in Europe. There was no deficiency of the heterokaryotic type, demonstrating that ITS divergence in this species is not correlated with reduced intercompatibility. A strain from North America, not assigned to a biological species, showed the same polymorphism. Cladistic analysis of the two ITS sequences showed that they were not sister groups. One of the ITS types formed a monophyletic group together with the ITS type of BSP 16, the other type formed a clade with the ITS type of H. incarnatulum (BSP 18). BSP 16 and 17 showed partial intercompatibility. However, several lines of evidence suggest that the polymorphism of BSP 17 is not the result of frequent and continuing hybridisation with BSP 16. Instead, we give arguments for the hypothesis that the polymorphism evolved in allopatry and that the two types have come together relatively recently. The results of the polymorphism indicate a potential problem for molecular identification of fungal species based on ITS fingerprinting. The results also show that no generalisations are possible about the relation of speciation (the formation of BSP) and nuclear ITS divergence.
S736	D. Begerow;R. Bauer;F. Oberwinkler	2001	Muribasidiospora: Microstromatales or Exobasidiales?	Mycological Research	105	7	798-810	10.1017/S0953756201004208			Characteristics of hyphal septation, cellular interaction, sporulation, cultures and/or nucleotide sequences from the 5' terminal domain of the nuclear large subunit rRNA gene of some species of Exobasidium, Microstroma and Muribasidiospora were examined and compared. Our analyses show that the order Microstromatales comprises Microstroma, Muribasidiospora triumfetticola and the anamorphic species Rhodotorula bacarum, R. phylloplana and Sympodiomycopsis paphiopedili, whereas Muribasidiospora hesperidium and Muribasidiospora indica are members of the Exobasidiales. Because of the high degree of morphological divergence between Muribasidiospora triumfetticola and Microstroma, a new genus, Volvocisporium, and a new family, Volvocisporiaceae, of the Microstromatales are proposed. Apart from the phylogenetic implications, the most interesting observations in the present work are the unusual development of the basidia, especially of the basidiospores, and the nutrient transport system from the host attacking hyphae to the basidia in Muribasidiospora triumfetticola.
S831	G. F. Bills;R. M. Arias;M. Reyes;G. Heredia	2001	Merimbla humicoloides sp.nov. from conifer forest soil of Veracruz State, Mexico	Mycological Research	105	10	1273-1279	10.1016/S0953-7562(08)62000-6			Merimbla humicoloides sp. nov. was isolated after heat treatment of soil collected in a pine forest of Veracruz state, Mexico. The fungus is characterized by pale buff to cinnamon colonies that become dark brown to black in reverse and conidiophores that vary from irregularly asymmetrical penicilli to symmetrical penicilli with inflated metulae, and Humicola-like chlamydospores on the submerged hyphae. Phylogenetic inferences made from the ITS1-5.8S-ITS2 rDNA sequences indicate that M. humicoloides is a member of the Trichocomaceae and that it is related to M. ingelheimensis, Hamigera avellanea, and Penicillium species.
S561	S. Ekman	2001	Molecular phylogeny of the Bacidiaceae (Lecanorales, lichenized Ascomycota)	Mycological Research	105	7	783-797	10.1017/S0953756201004269			The phylogeny of the family Bacidiaceae (Lecanorales, Ascomycota) was investigated using 65 nuclear ITS1-5,8S-ITS2 ribosomal DNA sequences, 63 of which were newly determined. After exclusion of ambiguous alignment, the data set contained 285 variable characters, 212 of which were parsimony-informative. Phylogenetic estimations were performed with maximum parsimony (unweighted and weighted) and maximum likelihood optimality criteria. Four different phylogenetic hypotheses were tested using a parametric bootstrap approach to simulate the expected null distribution of the difference between the globally optimal tree and the best (constrained) tree agreeing with the null hypotheses under unweighted and weighted parsimony, and maximum likelihood: (1) the genus Bacidia is monophyletic; (2) the genus Bacidina is monophyletic; (3) the genus Toninia is monophyletic; and (4) the family Ramalinaceae is monophyletic and distinct from a monophyletic Bacidiaceae. The monophyly of Bacidia, Toninia, and the Ramalinaceae was rejected under all circumstances. Hence, Bacidiaceae is likely to be a younger synonym of Ramalinaceae. The monophyly of Bacidina was not rejected under any optimality criterion. Furthermore, the data set suggests that the Bacidia beckhausii and B. sabuletorum groups are unrelated to Bacidia s. str., that Megalaria is monophyletic, and that Lecania auct. is polyphyletic.
S507	G. Gulden;S. Dunham;J. Stockman	2001	DNA Studies in the Galerina marginata complex	Mycological Research	105	4	432-440	10.1017/S0953756201003707			The distinctiveness of the European Galerina marginata and the American G. autumnalis is tested with analyses of DNA sequences from the internal transcribed spacer (ITS-2) of the nuclear ribosomal repeat and RFLP analysis of the entire ITS region. European and North American material from six taxa described in the subgenus Naucoriopsis K¸hner ex Gulden of Galerina Earle are included along with out-group material of six taxa representing two other subgenera of Galerina. The results do not indicate any genetic difference between species by Smith & Singer referred to the two 'stirpes' Marginata and Autumnalis of Naucoriopsis, i.e., G. autumnalis Peck, G. marginata (Batsch) K¸hner, G. oregonensis, G. pseudomycenopsis Pil·t, G. unicolor (Vahl) Singer, and G. venenata A.H. Sm., and all except G. pseudomycenopsis are considered later synonyms of G. marginata. Galerina badipes (Fr.) K¸hner (= G. cedretorum (Maire) Singer var. bispora A.H. Sm. & Singer) of 'stirps' Cedretorum is well supported as a distinct species. Subgenus Naucoriopsis appears as a distinct infrageneric unit well separated from the infrageneric units represented by the out-group species.
S489	K. W. Hughes;R. H. Petersen;J. E. Johnson;J. M. Moncalvo;R. Vilgalys;S. A. Redhead;T. Thomas;L. L. McGhee	2001	Infrageneric phylogeny of Collybia s. str. based on sequences of ribosomal ITS and LSU regions	Mycological Research	105	2	164-172	10.1017/S0953756200003415			Collybia, as understood by Antonin & Noordeloos, comprises four species: C. racemosa, C. tuberosa, C. cirrhata and C. cookei. Collybia tuberosa, C. cirrhata and C. cookei are morphologically similar and are primarily distinguished from each other by the presence or absence and the colour of sclerotia. All four share a common and unique habitat. Phylogenetic reconstructions using DNA sequences of the ribosomal ITS1-5.8S-ITS2 support four distinct clades, each corresponding to a morphological species, with the C. tuberosa, C. cirrhata and C. cookei clades forming a larger group. Analyses of ribosomal Large Subunit DNA sequences confirmed that Collybia tuberosa, C. cirrhata and C. cookei formed a monophyletic group. In both analyses, the C. racemosa sequence was highly divergent from those of the other three species of the complex and we propose a separate genus name, Dendrocollybia, for this species. Simple diagnostic RFLP patterns were identified for the four species and were used to validate morphological designations and distributions.
S641	R. Kirschner;D. Begerow;F. Oberwinkler	2001	A new Chionosphaera species associated with conifer inhabiting bark beetles	Mycological Research	105	11		10.1017/S0953756201005019			An undescribed species of the heterobasidiomycetous genus Chionosphaera is carried by the bark beetles Dryocoetus autographus, Hylurgops palliatus, Ips acuminatus, Ips sexdentatus, Ips typographus, Orthotomicus laricis, Pityogenes chalcographus, Pityokteines spinidens, and Polygraphus poligraphus infesting conifers in Europe (Abies alba, Larix decidua, Picea abies, and Pinus sylvestris). Chionosphaera cuniculicola sp. nov. differs morphologically from C. apobasidialis in the more slender basidiospores. The segregation of the two species is supported by comparison of partial sequences of the large subunit of the ribosomal gene. Isotype material of Chionosphaera lichenicola was re-examined. In contrast to C. cuniculicola and C. apobasidialis, C. lichenicola exhibits clamps at the septa. Fibulostilbum phylacicola is considered as a clamp-bearing species of Chionosphaera.
S615	R. Lindemuth;N. Wirtz;H. T. Lumbsch	2001	Phylogenetic analysis of nuclear and mitochondrial rDNA sequences supports the view that loculoascomycetes (Ascomycota) are not monophyletic	Mycological Research	105	10	1176-1181	10.1016/S0953-7562(08)61988-7			The loculoascomycetes are defined by the initiation of ascoma development prior to dikaryotisation and functionally bitunicate asci. Previous molecular studies suggested non-monophyly of loculoascomycetes and consequently, Chaetothyriomycetes and Dothideomycetes were distinguished. We have used sequences of nu SSU rDNA, nu LSU rDNA, and mt SSU rDNA to re-evaluate the monophyly of loculoascomycetes. 13 new sequences of these regions from 10 species, including two representatives of Pezizomycetes used as outgroup, were aligned with sequences obtained from Genbank. A combined data set was analysed phylogenetically using maximum parsimony. The Chaetothyriomycetes and Eurotiomycetes form a sister-group, supported by a bootstrap value of 97%, suggesting that loculoascomycetes are not monophyletic. A topology constrained to loculoascomycete monophyly can be rejected as being significantly worse using parametric bootstrapping. Our results also indicate that mt SSU rDNA sequence data are useful as additional characters to elucidate the phylogeny of ascomycetes at the rank of different classes. Additional data from more representatives of these groups and other ascomycetes are required to clarify whether the loculoascomycetes are a paraphyletic or polyphyletic assemblage.
S675	H. T. Lumbsch;R. Lindemuth	2001	Major lineages of Dothideomycetes (Ascomycota) inferred from SSU and LSU rDNA sequences	Mycological Research	105	8	901-908	10.1016/S0953-7562(08)61945-0			The phylogeny of the Dothideomycetes was investigated using nucleotide sequences of SSU and LSU rDNA. 32 new sequences of these regions from 18 species were aligned with five sequences obtained from GenBank, including two representatives of Pezizomycetes used as outgroup. A combined data set of SSU and LSU rDNA was analysed phylogenetically using neighbour-joining and maximum likelihood. The pseudoparaphysate taxa (Pleosporales incl. Melanommatales) form a monophyletic group. A separation of Melanommatales can be rejected using parametric bootstrapping, and this supports previous results obtained from SSU rDNA studies. The aparaphysate Dothideomycetes form a sister-group to the Pleosporales, but with low bootstrap support. Within these species, two well-supported groups can be distinguished, the Dothideales s. str. and the Capnodiales with Myriangiales as sister-groups. The Myriangiales appear paraphyletic, but this has only poor bootstrap support. A monophyly of Dothideales comprising Capnodiales can be rejected with parametric bootstrapping as well as a subdivision of the loculoascomycetes based on form and opening of the ascomata and ascus. The phylogeny of the aparaphysate taxa requires further studies.
S485	H. T. Lumbsch;I. Schmitt;H. Döring;M. Wedin	2001	Molecular systematics supports the recognition of an additional order of Ascomycota: the Agyriales	Mycological Research	105	1	16-23	10.1017/S095375620000321X			SSU rRNA gene sequences of Anamylopsora pulcherrima (Anamylopsoraceae), Placopsis gelida, Trapelia involuta and T. placodioides (Agyriaceae) were determined and aligned with the corresponding sequences of 39 other ascomycetes. Phylogenetic analysis (maximum parsimony, spectral analysis) of these sequences placed the Agyriineae outside the Lecanorales and suggested a sister group relationship to Ostropales/Pertusariales. The resurrection of the order Agyriales is proposed based on molecular and morphological data, such as faintly amyloid asci opening by dehiscence. The sequence data support the two families Agyriaceae and Anamylopsoraceae to be accomodated within the order Agyriales. The Agyriales, Ostropales and Pertusariales can be placed in the class Lecanoromycetes.
S643	M. Mirabolfathy;D. E. L. Cooke;J. M. Duncan;N. A.  Williams;D. Ershad;A. Alizadeh	2001	Phytophthora pistaciae sp. nov. and P. melonis (Katsura): the principal causes of pistachio gummosis in Iran	Mycological Research	105	10	1166-1175	10.1016/S0953-7562(08)61987-5			Two non-papillate species of Phytophthora are the principal cause of pistachio gummosis in Iran. Their previous description as P. megasperma and P. drechsleri was re-examined in the light of RFLPs and sequence comparisons of internal transcribed spacer (ITS) regions of rDNA. Both taxa were more closely related to a clade comprising P. sojae, P. cajani, P. vignae, P. melonis and P. sinensis than to the unrelated P. megasperma s. str. or P. drechsleri. The P. megasperma-like isolates from pistachio differed from all the above taxa in morphology, ITS sequence and AFLP patterns, and are described as a new species, P. pistaciae. The P. drechsleri-like isolates from pistachio had identical ITS sequences to those of P. melonis, P. sinensis and P. drechsleri-like isolates from cucurbits in Iran and the AFLP profiles of P. melonis, P. sinensis and the P. drechsleri-like isolates from pistachio were virtually identical. This and other published isozyme and mtDNA evidence suggests these taxa should be considered conspecific and all subsumed within P. melonis with a revised host range and geographical distribution. The relationships of P. melonis and P. pistaciae with other members belonging to the same ITS clade are considered.
S633	S. Shen;P. H. Goodwin;T. Hsiang	2001	Hemibiotrophic infection and identity of the fungus, Colletotrichum destructivum, causing anthracnose of tobacco	Mycological Research	105	11	1340-1347	10.1017/S0953756201005111			The causal agent of tobacco anthracnose was identified as Colletotrichum destructivum based on the morphology of the fungus and a comparison of the sequence of the rDNA ITS with those of other Colletotrichum species. The infection process on tobacco (Nicotiana tabacum and N. benthamiana) was examined by light microscopy, which revealed that the pathogen acted as an intracellular hemibiotroph. Penetration occurred preferentially at the anticlinal walls of epidermal cells by an appressorium and penetration peg. An infection vesicle formed in the penetrated host cell by 48 h after inoculation, and out of this, a multi-lobed infection vesicle grew which remained limited to the initially infected cell. The interaction at this point was biotrophic, which was confirmed by plasmolysis and accumulation of a vital stain by the infected host cells. Thin secondary hyphae arose from multi-lobed infection vesicles at 60h after inoculation, which then penetrated the host cell wall and began the necrotrophic phase of the infection. Acervuli formed on the plant surface by 96h after inoculation, typically with a single melanized seta. In addition to tobacco, the fungus could infect alfalfa, cowpea, and Medicago truncatula, but not soybean. The process of infection of C. destructivum in tobacco was very similar to that previously reported in alfalfa and cowpea.
S685	K. Agretious Thomas;U. Peintner;M. M. Moser;P. Manimohan	2002	Anamika, a new mycorrhizal genus of Cortinariaceae from India and its phylogenetic position based on ITS and LSU sequences	Mycological Research	106	2	245-251	10.1017/S0953756201005445			Anamika gen. nov. is described from southern India with one species, A. indica sp. nov. The genus is characterized by spores with a strongly cavernous ornamentation due to cavernae in the epitunica (perispore), and the possession of cheilo-, pleuro-, and caulocystidia. It seems to be associated with Hopea species (Dipterocarpaceae). Molecular data suggest a close relationship to Hebeloma and Naucoria, but indicate that it represents an independent line of evolution.
S616	H. H. Chou;W. S. Wu	2002	Phylogenetic Analysis of Internal Transcribed Spacer Regions of the Genus Alternaria, and the Significance of Filament-Beaked Conidia	Mycological Research	106	2	164-169	10.1017/S0953756201005317			Internal transcribed regions (ITS1 and ITS2) of 11 different fungi, i.e. 8 species of Alternaria, Nimbya gomphrenae, Stemphylium vesicarium, and Ulocladium botrytis, were sequenced. Their phylogenetic relationships with another 36 species in Pleosporaceae in GenBank were analyzed by parsimony and distance methods. These two methods positioned filament-beaked Alternaria as a monophyletic group discrete from the other members in genus Alternaria. A hypothesis proposing that the filament-beaked speices of Alternaria evolved a particular evolutionary route distinguishable from other species based on molecular evidence, the unique traits of morphological adaptation for liberation and their subsistent strategies has been discussed.
S650	J. Collado;A. González;G. Platas;A. M. Stchigel;J. Guarro;F. Peláez	2002	Monosporascus ibericus sp. nov., an endophytic ascomycete from plants on saline soils, with observations on the position of the genus based on sequence analysis of the 18S rDNA	Mycological Research	106	1	118-127 	10.1017/S0953756201005172			A new pyrenomycete, Monosporascus ibericus sp. nov., isolated as an endophyte from roots and stems of three plant species growing on sand flats and salt marshes in the Ebro Delta (Spain), is described. The main characteristic of this fungus is the presence of a higher number of ascospores per ascus (up to six), compared to the other species of the genus: M. cannonballus, M. eutypoides, and M. monosporus. M. ibericus produces a cleistothecial ascomata with a tomentose peridium and lacks an anamorph. In addition to the morphological data, the comparative analysis of the ITS-region sequences of M. ibericus and the other Monosporascus spp., has supported the recognition of the new species. A phylogenetic study based on the sequences of the 18S rDNA did not allow us to assess clearly the taxonomic position of the genus Monosporascus, although the results indicated the genus might have affinities to the Xylariales rather than to the Sordariales.
S693	R. J. Deckert;T. Hsiang;R. L. Peterson	2002	Genetic relationships of endophytic Lophodermium nitens isolates from needles of Pinus strobus L	Mycological Research	106	3	305-313	10.1017/S0953756201005494			The foliage of Pinus strobus (eastern white pine), as that of all other conifers examined, is occupied by endophytic fungi, the most frequent of which is Lophodermium nitens. The number and extent of endophytic infections and the genetic relationship of individual isolates within living needles as well as their relationship to isolates from forest floor needles is unknown. To examine these and related questions, forest floor isolates and foliar endophytes from needle segments were obtained for ribosomal DNA sequencing and randomly amplified polymorphic DNA (RAPD) analysis. Molecular and morphological data were compared and infection frequency determined as a function of position along the needle. Ribosomal DNA sequences of foliar and ascospore isolates showed high levels of genetic similarity (>97% identity) for the internal transcribed spacer region. RAPD profiles were able to distinguish ascospore siblings from non-siblings, and also revealed that many needle isolates belonged to the same genotype as adjacent neighbour isolates, as would be expected from mycelial spread within the needle. Morphotype evaluation and RAPD profiles showed similar patterns: identical morphotypes grouped together and showed little or no genetic difference under RAPD analysis. Both morphological and molecular data indicated that the majority of infections were contained within 1 mm needle segments but could extend to about 4 mm in length. Infection frequency increased along the length of the needle from the proximal (shoot) end to the distal tip, with markedly higher rates in the distal quarter. Thus, endophytic infections of L. nitens in white pine needles consist of many localized, discrete infections, originating from ascospores and differentially distributed along the length of the needle. In the course of this work, it was found that GenBank accession no. AF203470 under the name Meloderma desmaszieresii appeared not to be that species but L. nitens on the basis of the ITS sequences.
S772	K. Hansen;T. Læssøe;D. H. Pfister	2002	Phylogenetic diversity in the core group of Peziza inferred from ITS sequences and morphology	Mycological Research	106	8	879-902	10.1017/S0953756202006287			Species delimitation within the core group of Peziza is highly controversial. The group, typified by P. vesiculosa, is morphologically coherent and in previous analyses of LSU rDNA sequences it formed a highly supported clade. Phylogenetic diversity and species limits were investigated within the group using sequences from the complete ITS region (ITS1–5.8S-ITS2). Eighty-three specimens were selected for molecular study from a larger sample of material studied morphologically to explore the intra- and interspecific variation of each putative species. The sister group taxon, P. ampelina was used as the outgroup and two specimens of P. subcitrina were additionally included. Seven independent lineages of rDNA were identified (I—VII), each representing one to several species. These lineages form two larger clades, A (II, and I or III) and B (IV-VII), supported by macromorphology: small (generally < 2 cm), shallowly cup- to disc-shaped apothecia (A) and large (up to 15 cm), deeply cup-shaped to expanded apothecia (B). The overall exciple structure (a stratified or non-stratified medullary layer) and to some degree spore surface relief, likewise support the groupings. Clade A contains taxa with smooth or nearly smooth spores (except for P. lohjaënsis), while clade B contains taxa with a range of spore ornamentations, from smooth, finely warty to distinctly warty, and spiny. The position of groups I (P. vesiculosa and P. ammophila) and III (P. lohjaënsis) are uncertain, and these taxa also deviate morphologically from the other clade A members. The following species are recognized based on morphology and ITS rDNA analyses: P. ammophila and P. vesiculosa (I); P. alcis, P. ampliata, P. domiciliana, P. fumeti, P. nivalis, and a number of putative species or intraspecific entities (II); P. lohjaënsis (III); P. sp. c (IV); P. arvernensis (V); P. echinispora and P. sp. d (VI); and P. varia (VII). The nomenclature of these species is analyzed and taxa are typified as necessary. Based on ITS and morphology, we found no justification for recognizing more than one species in the ‘P. varia complex’, including 27 specimens that have been referred to under the names P. cerea, P. micropus and P. repanda, from an array of substrates and different geographical areas. Morphological characters previously used to delimit species within this complex, such as colour variation of the apothecia, presence or absence of a stipe, stratified or non-stratified medullary exciple (or thickness of the excipular layers), cell types in the outermost exciple and moniliform vs filiform paraphyses were not correlated with the subgroups supported by ITS analyses and appeared to be plastic. Therefore, P. cerea and P. micropus are placed in synonymy with P. varia. The name P. repanda is rejected. Levels of sequence divergence were low within group II, comprising 33 small apothecial specimens. Twelve fine-scale lineages were identified, but the analyses did not resolve relationships among these. P. granulosa sensu Boudier is considered a synonym of P. fimeti. These have previously been distinguished mainly by occurrence on various soil types, including burnt soil and soil mixed with sawdust or woodchips vs on dung. The substrate and habitat have been much emphasized in the taxonomy of Peziza, but the results obtained here indicate that populations on a diverse array of substrates may be closely related, or indeed, conspecific.
S780	J. C. Kang;P. W. Crous;G. R. A. McHau;M. Serdani;S. H. Song	2002	Phylogenetic analysis of Alternaria spp. associated with apple core rot and citrus black rot in South Africa	Mycological Research	106	10	1151-1162	10.1017/S0953756202006524			Dry core rot of apple (DCR) and Alternaria black rot of citrus (ABR) have in the past respectively been ascribed to Alternaria alternata and A. citri. In recent years, however, it has been speculated that several other species of Alternaria could also be associated with these diseases. In an attempt to elucidate the identity of these taxa, 25 isolates associated with DCR, and 26 isolates associated with ABR were selected for molecular characterisation. Nucleotide sequences of 1116 sites including the histone gene section and the internal transcribed spacers (ITS 1 and 2) of the rRNA gene were determined for these isolates. The gene trees generated from the individual and combined data sets using maximum parsimony, maximum likelihood and neighbour-joining analysis methods distinguished five clades with strong bootstrap support, namely Alternaria sp., A. arborescens, A. infectoria, A. tenuissima, and a clade containing isolates variable in morphology, referred to as the Alternaria group. In the alignment of the combined ITS and histone data set, unique transition/transversion substitutions, as well as positional insertions and deletions were observed for each of the above clades. In addition, key sequences in the form of serial composing nucleotides in both the ITS and histone sections of the alignment were also discovered for the molecular identification of A. arborescens, A. infectoria and A. tenuissima. The final phylogeny also indicated that no host specificity existed among the species associated with these two post-harvest disease complexes. Contrary to the host specificity observed on leaf diseases of these hosts in the field, it appears that the post-harvest diseases are the result of adverse storage conditions and opportunism of different small-spored Alternaria spp.
S777	L. Kiss;A. Bolay;S. Takamatsu;R. T. A. Cook;O. Szentiványi;R. J. Boal;P. Jeffries	2002	Spread of the North American snowberry powdery mildew fungus, Erysiphe symphoricarpi (syn. Microsphaera symphoricarpi), to Europe	Mycological Research	106	9	1086-1092	10.1017/S0953756202006329			Recently, a powdery mildew anamorph infecting snowberry (Symphoricarpos albus) has been reported as a new plant pathogen in several European countries. We report here its occurrence in the UK, Germany and, for the first time, Switzerland. Based on morphological and scanning electron microscope (SEM) patterns, this novel pathogen appeared similar to the anamorph of a common North American powdery mildew, Erysiphe symphoricarpi (syn. Microsphaera symphoricarpi). A phylogenetic analysis of the internal transcribed spacer (ITS) sequences of the ribosomal DNA (rDNA) of an English and a North American snowberry powdery mildew fungus showed that they are conspecific. Ascomata of the pathogen were found only in one European collection, that being in Germany in 2002. The similarity in morphology of the ascomata also confirmed the co-identity of the European and American snowberry powdery mildews.
S649	P. Konstantinova;P. J. M. Bonants;M. P. E. van Gent-Pelzer;P. van der Zouwen;R. van den Bulk	2002	Development of specific primers for the detection and identification of Alternaria spp. in carrot material by PCR and comparison with blotter and plating assays	Mycological Research	106	1	23-33	10.1017/S0953756201005160			Alternaria alternata, A. radicina and A. dauci are important seed-borne fungi on carrot, with the first two species having a high toxigenic potential, for which a specific and sensitive detection method is required. Because both the traditional deep-freeze-blotter method and plating on selective medium are time consuming and laborious, a PCR-based assay was developed. Sequences of the internal transcribed spacer regions of the ribosomal gene repeat (rDNA) from 45 different Alternaria isolates were determined, a restriction fragment length polymorphism analysis was performed and a phylogenetic tree was constructed. Based on the sequences, specific primers for detection and identification of the three Alternaria species on carrot seeds and roots were designed. The primers were highly sensitive and were shown to be able to differentiate between the three Alternaria species. A. alternata and A. radicina could be detected in DNA isolated from carrot material applying the specific primers, even at low infection levels. The PCR-assay was compared to the deep-freeze-blotter method (DFBM) and plating on Alternaria radicina Selective Agar (ARSA, for A. radicina) by testing naturally infected seed samples and root material. Results of the PCR-assay were similar to those of the blotter method and plating on ARSA for the detection of A. alternata and A. radicina. A positive correlation was found between the percentage of seed infection established by the blotter method and the intensity of the amplified, specific product. The PCR-assay based on the specific primers developed seems to be a good alternative for the deep-freeze-blotter method and plating on ARSA, especially when time is an important issue.
S682	S. L. Miller;B. Buyck	2002	Molecular phylogeny of the genus Russula in Europe with a comparison of modern infrageneric classifications	Mycological Research	106	3	259-276	10.1017/S0953756202005610			Species in the large mushroom genus Russula are important ecologically as ectomycorrhizal fungi and economically as comestibles. Most infrageneric classification schemes of this genus have originated in Europe, but because of nomenclatural history and an evolving suite of characters these systems remain largely incongruent. Using ribosomal DNA sequences for 87 species representing all infrageneric taxa described from Europe, the phylogenetic position and relationships among these species were examined. Cladistic analysis of the ITS1, 5.8S, and ITS2 regions showed a cluster of five to six small to large clades basal in the topology and one large apical clade arising from the deeper nodes, none of which has been previously recognized in toto at the subgeneric level. Two of these groups, the Compactae and Pallidosporinae, which have been previously recognized as subsections of section Compacta, did not appear to be closely related. Bootstrap support and Bremer decay values indicated that collapse of the tree into monophyly at the deeper nodes would result in two large groups which are consistent with the classical subgeneric concept of the Eurussulae and a narrowed Compactae. The topology confirmed some previously described infrageneric taxa at the section level including the Tenellae and Heterophyllae and at the subsection level including the Cupreinae, Laricinae, Lilaceinae, Integroidinae, Violaceinae, Sphagnophilinae, Viridantinae, Emeticinae, Subvelatae, Pallidosporinae, and portions of the Polychromae and Sardoninae. The molecular analysis also indicated many interesting new combinations or relationships not previously conceived. Mapping of characters such as spore print colour, taste, and presence of acid resistant incrustations, which have been used to define infrageneric taxa in Russula, onto the phylogeny identified interesting patterns consistent with hypotheses regarding plesiomorphic and apomorphic characters. However, because of potential loss or reversal of character states, this analysis did not support their unequivocal use in infrageneric classification.
S708	M. Serdani;J. C. Kang;B. Andersen;P. W. Crous	2002	Characterisation of Alternaria species associated with core rot of apples in South Africa	Mycological Research	106	5	561-569	10.1017/S0953756202005993			Alternaria core rot of red apple cultivars is a serious post-harvest disease in South Africa. Thirty isolates of Alternaria spp. previously isolated from apple, together with reference isolates of A. alternata and A. infectoria, were characterised and grouped according to their sporulation patterns and conidial morphology. Isolates were identified as belonging to A. arborescens, A. infectoria and A. tenuissima species-groups. The isolates were also analysed for production of mycotoxins and other secondary metabolites and their cultural characteristics on DRYES medium were recorded. Apple fruit were artificially inoculated with the thirty-two Alternaria isolates and the resulting lesion types were recorded. A data matrix was constructed using all these characters and subjected to cluster analysis to show the similarity between different isolates. Isolates classified as A. infectoria species-group based on sporulation patterns, cultural and biochemical data could be easily differentiated from isolates classified as A. arborescens and A. tenuissima species-groups, which clustered close together. Isolates were further subjected to DNA sequence analysis of the internal transcribed spacers (ITS) 1 and 2 of the nuclear rRNA gene. A phylogeny estimated from the ITS data set delineated two clades, one being typified by the A. infectoria species-group, and the other representing both A. tenuissima and A. arborescens species-groups. The ITS data set clearly separated isolates of A. infectoria species-group from the other species-groups, as all isolates had a distinction of 35 base pair insertions and 6 base pair deletions in the ITS regions. The results obtained in the present study showed that the major pathogens associated with core rot disease of Top Red apples in South Africa belong to the A. tenuissima species-group.
S785	S. Ekman;T. Tønsberg	2002	Most species of Lepraria and Leproloma form a monophyletic group closely related to Stereocaulon	Mycological Research	106	11	1262-1276	10.1017/s0953756202006718			The phylogenetic position of members of the entirely asexually reproducing genera Lepraria and Leproloma was investigated using sequence data from the ITS1-5.8S-ITS2 and small subunit (SSU) nuclear ribosomal DNA. Phylogenetic reconstructions were carried out using a likelihood-based Bayesian Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) tree sampling technique and the unweighted least squares optimality criterion, the latter based on maximum likelihood distances obtained via an alignment-free distance estimation technique. The results indicate that most species currently referred to the genera Lepraria and Leproloma form a single monophyletic group. This monophyletic group is the sister group to Stereocaulon and Muhria and belongs in the Stereocaulaceae (Lecanorales, Lecanoromycetes, Ascomycota). This finding indicates that Lepraria has an ancestor that switched from a sexual to an asexual mode of dispersal. Subsequent speciation must have taken place in the absence of sexual processes, which contradicts the view of asexual taxa as 'evolutionary dead ends'. Leproloma is polyphyletic and nested within Lepraria. Lepraria flavescens is a Lecanora, probably belonging in subgenus Glaucomaria. Lepraria lesdainii and L. obtusatica are unrelated to each other and to other species currently referred to Lepraria or Leproloma. Leprocaulon and Crocynia are distantly related to the core group of Lepraria and Leproloma.
S765	S. W. Peterson;L. Sigler	2002	Four new Penicillium species having Thysanophora-like melanized conidiophores	Mycological Research	106	9	1109-1118	10.1017/s0953756202006433			Five fungal isolates, tentatively identified as belonging to Thysanophora, were re-examined to confirm their generic placement. DNA sequences from multiple loci were determined and compared to homologous sequences from other fungi. The Thysanophora-like isolates belong in the genus Penicillium on the basis of phylogenetic analysis of their gene sequences. Because these isolates have unique phylogenetic positions within Penicillium and have unique phenotypes we describe them as the new species P. boreae, P. subarcticum and P. canariense spp. nov. In addition, P. pullum sp. nov. is described for NRRL 721, which served as the typical isolate of P. fuscum in the monographic studies of Raper & Thom and Ramirez; however, the name P. fuscum has been applied and neotypified using a different specimen. NRRL 721 is markedly different phylogenetically from the neotype of P. fuscum.
S938	S. Garnica;M. Weifl;F. Oberwinkler	2003	Morphological and molecular phylogenetic studies in South American Cortinarius species	Mycological Research	107	10	1/14/2012				Thirty South American species of Cortinarius belonging to the subgenera Telamonia, Dermocybe, Myxacium, Phlegmacium, and Cystogenes were studied using an integrated approach that included morphological, anatomical, and ultrastructural data, and also molecular phylogenetic analysis of nuclear rDNA sequences. The micromorphology of the basidiomes was studied by light microscopy, and the principal structures were illustrated by line drawings. Basidiospore ornamentation was studied by scanning electron microscopy (SEM). Internal transcribed spacers (ITS, including the 5.8S gene) and the D1/D2 domains of the large ribosomal subunit were sequenced and analysed using a Bayesian Markov chain Monte Carlo method to estimate phylogenetic relationships between the studied Cortinarius species. Morphology and anatomy of the pileus surface and basidiome pigmentation appeared to be the most useful characters to delimit some natural groups, whereas microcharacters related to the structure of pileus context, hymenophoral and stipe trama were of little taxonomic value. Basidiospore morphology and cheilocystidia seem to be taxonomically relevant at the species level. The following infrageneric five groups were supported by the morphological, chemical and molecular data: (1) Telamonia characterized by wide hyaline hyphae of the veil and by small basidiomes; (2) Dermocybe spp. with an epicutis as the most external layer of the pileus, and skyrin and hypericin pigments; (3) Dermocybe spp. with a thin viscid layer on the pileus, and endocrocin and dermolutein pigments; (4) Phlegmacium spp. characterized by a long and radicating stipe and (5) Phlegmacium spp. that overlap in some macrocharacters with Telamonia species. Our analyses suggest that classification concepts based mainly on macromorphological characters are likely to lead to artificial grouping, whereas certain microscopical and chemical characters seem to be useful in constructing a more natural classification system for Cortinarius.
S749	S. Heidmarsson	2003	Molecular study of Dermatocarpon miniatum (Verrucariales) and allied taxa	Mycological Research	107	4	459-468	10.1017/S0953756203007652			The phylogeny of the Dermatocarpon miniatum-complex (Verrucariales, lichenized Ascomycota) was studied using nuclear ITS sequence data by both parsimony and Bayesian inference of phylogeny. The ITS region contains a substantial amount of variation which resolves the relationships of terminal groups, while the more basal clades have low support in the analyses. D. miniatum var. miniatum and var. complicatum are polyphyletic, while var. cirsodes is monophyletic but located within the complex, as are both D. leptophyllum and D. linkolae. The variation within the D. miniatum-complex is significantly greater than that between some transatlantic species such as D. luridum and D. meiophyllizum. The new names D. taminium sp. nov. from the Greater Sonoran area, and D. tenue comb. nov. (syn. D. muehlenbergii var. tenue) are introduced.
S799	U. Peintner;M. M. Moser;K. A. Thomas;P. Manimohan	2003	First records of ectomycorrhizal Cortinarius species (Agaricales, Basidiomycetes) from tropical India and their phylogenetic position based on rDNA ITS sequences	Mycological Research	107	4	485-494	10.1017/S0953756203007585			Three new Cortinarius species Cortinarius conopileus, C. keralensis, and C. phlegmophorus spp. nov., are described from Kerala State in southern India. This is the first record of ectomycorrhizal Cortinarius spp. in the tropical part of India. In addition to distinct morphological characters, the comparative analysis of rDNA ITS sequences of the collections from India and morphologically similar species support the recognition of these taxa as new species. Phylogenetic analyses demonstrate that the three Indian Cortinarius spp. belong to both larger subclades of the genus Cortinarius, clade/cortinarius and clade/telamonia. As supported by morphological and molecular data, C. phlegmophorus belongs to Cortinarius subgen. Myxacium sect. Defibulati. Based on classical morphological characters, both C. keralensis and C. conopileus are representatives of subgen. Telamonia. However, C. conopileus belongs to clade/obtusi, which is a well-supported subclade of clade/cortinarius. Thus, in contrast to classical taxonomy, the clade/obtusi represents an independent evolutionary origin of telamonioid taxa. This result is also reflected by the distinct morphological characters of taxa of clade/obtusi, namely the lamellar trama with ellipsoid inflated hyphae and the presence of cystidia. In contrast, C. keralensis is a typical member of clade/telamonia. Within/telamonia, only relationships of closely related taxa are resolved due to the low genetic divergence found in ITS sequences. Based on morphological and molecular criteria, C. keralensis is a distinct taxon of sect. Saturnini.
S985	F. N. Martin;P. W. Tooley	2003	Phylogenetic relationships of Phytophthora ramorum, P. nemorosa and P. pseudosyringae, three species recovered from areas in California with sudden oak death	Mycological Research	107	12	1379-1391	10.1017/s0953756203008785			Sudden oak death has been an emerging disease problem in coastal California and has caused significant losses in forest ecosystems in some regions of the state. The causal agent of this disease has been described as Phytophthora ramorum with two other less aggressive species, Phytophthora nemorosa and Phytophthora pseudosyringae, recovered from some symptomatic plants. The phylogenetic relationship of these species with other members of the genus was examined by sequence alignment of 667 bp of the mitochondrially-encoded cytochrome oxidase II gene and the nuclear encoded rDNA internal transcribed spacer region. P. ramorum was most closely related to P. hibernalis and P. lateralis in trees from both regions, although the specific relationship among species differed depending on the tree. In the cox II tree these species were on a single clade with P. lateralis basal to a group containing P. ramorum and P. hibernalis. On the maximum parsimony ITS tree P. ramorum was most closely affiliated with P. lateralis and in the same clade as P. hibernalis, but with maximum likelihood analysis P. ramorum was basal to a grouping of P. hibernalis and P. lateralis. While bootstrap support was strong for the grouping of these species together, it was not for determining the relationship among them. In contrast to the cox II tree, the clade containing these three species grouped with P. cryptogea, P. drechsleri, P. erythroseptica, and P. syringae in the ITS tree. Since the same isolates of these species were used for both the cox II and ITS sequence analysis, this difference in species grouping suggests either a differential rate of evolutionary divergence for these two regions, incorrect assumptions about alignment of ITS sequences or different evolutionary histories of the regions under study. Analysis of combined cox II and ITS data sets gave trees where the relationships among these species were the same as for the ITS tree alone, although the results of the partition homogeneity test (P=0.072) suggest caution should be used in interpretation of this data. All analyses supported a close relationship between P. ilicis, P. nemorosa and P. pseudosyringae, although the analysis did not clarify the evolutionary relationships among these three species. Interestingly, these three species had a unique 6 bp deletion in the cox II gene just before the termination codon. While there was some similarity in phylogenetic grouping of these species and morphological characteristics, this was not consistent across all comparisons in the genus. Data would suggest that P. ramorum, P. nemorosa and P. pseudosyringae are phylogenetically distinct new species and not the result of interspecific hybridization.
S1468	L. A. Castlebury;A. Y. Rossman;G. H. Sung;A. S. Hyten;J. W. Spatafora	2004	Multigene phylogeny reveals new lineage for Stachybotrys chartarum	Mycological Research	108		864-872				Stachybotrys chartarum is an asexually reproducing fungus commonly isolated from soil and litter that is also known to occur in indoor environments and is implicated as the cause of serious illness and even death in humans. Despite its economic importance, higher level phylogenetic relationships of Stachybotrys have not been determined nor has a sexual state for S. chartarum been reported. DNA sequences from four nuclear and one mitochondrial gene were analyzed to determine the ordinal and familial placement of Stachybotrys within the Euascomycota. These data reveal that species of Stachybotrys isolates including S. chartarum, S. albipes, for which the sexual state Melanopsamma pomiformis is reported, species of Myrothecium, and two other tropical hypocrealean species form a previously unknown monophyletic lineage within the Hypocreales. These results suggest that species of Stachybotrys and Myrothecium are closely related and share characteristics with other hypocrealean fungi. In addition, S. chartarum may have a sexual state in nature that consists of small, black, fleshy perithecia similar to Melanopsamma.
S1061	M. Lutz;R. Bauer;D. Begerow;F. Oberwinkler	2004	Tuberculina-Thanatophytum/rhizoctonia crocorum-Helicobasidium: a unique mycoparasitic-phytoparasitic life strategy	Mycological Research	108	3	227-238				Tuberculina species are mitosporic parasites of rust fungi. Recently, we demonstrated that Tuberculina represents the asexual life stage of the plant-parasitic genus Helicobasidium. Here we reveal host specificity of Tuberculina and Helicobasidium species on rust fungal hosts by means of infection experiments and molecular analyses. We inoculated species of the rust genera Chrysomyxa, Coleosporium, Cronartium, Gymnosporangium, Puccinia, Tranzschelia, and Uromyces with conidia and with basidiospores of Helicobasidium longisporum and H. purpureum, and with conidia of Tuberculina maxima, T. persicina, and T. sbrozzii. In addition, we analyzed base sequences from the ITS region of the nuclear large subunit ribosomal DNA of 51 Tuberculina and Helicobasidium specimens collected in the field together with the sequences from the Tuberculina infections obtained in the infection experiments. The data show that there are at least six monophyletic lineages within the Tuberculina/Helicobasidium-group that are unambiguously distinguished by molecular and morphological characters and a specific host spectrum of the Tuberculina-stage. The thereby revealed diversity opens up new vistas on the evolution of that exceptional mycoparasitic-phytoparasitic fungal group.
S1138	T. Oda;C. Tanaka;M. Tsuda	2004	Molecular phylogeny and biogeography of the widely distributed Amanita species, A. muscaria and A. pantherina	Mycological Research							The molecular phylogeny and biogeography of two widely distributed Amanita species,A.muscaria and A.pantherina, were studied based on specimens from diverse localities.Analyses of both a partial sequence of the ITS region of nuclear DNA and a partial sequence of the b tubulin gene were able to resolve specimens of each species.Analyses revealed a greater divergence of the b tubulin region than the ITS region.Based on molecular phylogeny of the combination of the ITS and b tubulin regions,A.muscaria could be separated into at least three groups (Eurasian,Eurasian subalpine,and North American),and A.pantherina could be separated into at least two groups (North American and Eurasian).We hypothesize that the speciation of A.muscaria occurred in Eurasia with subsequent migration to North America via land bridges.However,it is impossible to determine whether A.pantherina moved from Eurasia to North America or vice versa .For both A.muscaria and A.pantherina ,the intracontinental relationships of both Eurasia and North America were closer than the relationships between eastern Asia and eastern North America.
S1331	D. Rekab;G. D. Sorbo;C. Reggio;A. Zoina;G. Firrao	2004	Polymorphisms in nuclear rDNA and mtDNA reveal the polyphyletic nature of isolates of Phomopsis pathogenic to sunflower and a tight monophiletic clade of defined geographic origin	Mycological Research	108	4	393-402	10.1017/S0953756204009372			The molecular diversity of Diaporthe helianthi (anamorph Phomopsis helianthi), the causal agent of sunflower stem canker, was studied in 16 isolates of different geographic origin using nuclear and mitochondrial markers. PCR products corresponding to the internal transcribed spacers (ITS1 and ITS2) of the nuclear ribosomal RNA gene, and to the mitochondrial atp6 gene were sequenced. The ITS1 and ITS2 sequences were compared with those of Phomopsis spp. and Diaporthe spp. obtained from databases. The diversity in the region surrounding the atp6 gene was also studied by restriction analysis using four enzymes. The analyses revealed a marked diversity within the sunflower-isolated strains, which appear to belong to phylogenetically unrelated groups. Noticeably, all the isolates collected in France and in the former Yugoslavia, where severe epiphytotics of sunflower stem canker are frequently reported, showed high similarity to each other forming a clade which clearly differentiated from all other ones within the génus Phomopsis. Conversely, all the isolates collected in Italy, where, despite favourable environmental conditions, the incidence of the disease is low, were only distantly related to the former group and showed sequence similarity with other previously established phylogenetic clades within the Phomopsis/Diaporthe complex.
S1126	G. J. M. Verkley;P. W. Crous;J. Z. Groenewald;U. Braun;A. Aptroot	2004	Mycosphaerella punctiformis revisited: morphology, phylogeny, and epitypification of the type species of the genus Mycosphaerella (Dothideales, Ascomycota)	Mycological Research							Mycosphaerella punctiformis, the type species of the genus Mycosphaerella, is epitypified by material collected on Quercus robur in the Netherlands. The teleomorph is described in planta, and the Ramularia anamorph, for which the new name R. endophylla is proposed, and the Asteromella spermatial state are characterized in vitro. Sequence data of the nuclear ribosomal DNA are presented and analyzed together with other Mycosphaerella spp. with Ramularia and several other anamorphs. Several strains originating from Quercus, Acer and Tilia showed diverging ITS sequences, indicating that the M. punctiformis complex may comprise more than a single phylogenetic species, but this could not be confirmed by the analysis of our dataset. An endophytic phase is established for the first time in the lifecycle of M. punctiformis, as the species was repeatedly isolated from surface sterilized green healthy leaves of Quercus robur in summer at the epitype locality.
S1172	H. L. Andersen;S. Ekman	2005	Disintegration of the Micareaceae (lichenized Ascomycota) - a molecular phylogeny based on mitochondrial rDNA sequences	Mycological Research	109	1	21-30	10.1017/S0953756204001625			The phylogeny of the family Micareaceae and the genus Micarea was studied using mitochondrial small subunit ribosomal DNA sequences. Phylogenetic reconstructions were performed using Bayesian MCMC tree sampling and a maximum likelihood approach. The Micareaceae in its current sense is highly heterogeneous, and Helocarpon, Psilolechia, and Scutula, all thought to be close relatives of Micarea, are shown to be only distantly related. The genus Micarea is paraphyletic unless the entire Pilocarpaceae and Ectolechiaceae are included, as also indicated by an expected likelihood weights test. It is suggested that the Micareaceae is reduced to synonymy with the Pilocarpaceae, which also includes the Ectolechiaceae, and that Micarea may have to be divided into a series of smaller genera in the future. Micarea species with a Œnon-micareoid‚ photobiont group with Psora and the Ramalinaceae, whereas Micarea intrusa appears to belong in Scoliciosporum. Three species fall inside the paraphyletic Micarea: Szczawinskia tsugae, Catillaria contristans, and Fellhaneropsis vezdae. Tropical foliicolous taxa are nested within groups of mainly temperate and arctic-alpine distribution. A Œmicareoid‚ photobiont appears to be plesiomorphic in the Pilocarpaceae but has been lost a few times.
S1314	A. Avila;J. Z. Groenewald;A. Trapero;P. W. Crous	2005	Characterisation and epitypification of Pseudocercospora cladosporioides, the causal organism of Cercospora leaf spot of olives	Mycological Research	109	8	881-888				Cercospora leaf spot of olives is a serious defoliating disease attributed to Pseudocercospora cladosporioides. Although the disease is well distributed throughout olive growing regions of the world, its epidemiology and population structure remains unknown. The aim of this study was thus to establish the genetic variability of Spanish isolates of P. cladosporioides using DNA sequence data from the ITS region, as well as two protein-coding genes, actin and calmodulin. Phylogenetic data obtained here support P. cladosporioides to be closely related to other species of Pseudocercospora that reside in Mycosphaerella. Spanish isolates clustered in two clades, indicating that isolates from Catalonia were somewhat different from those collected in Andalucia. However, isolates appeared to be genetically relatively uniform, suggesting that chemical control of this disease via a managed spraying programme may prove a viable option for controlling the disease in Spain.
S1415	J. B. Blanco-Dios;Z. Wang;M. Binder;D. S. Hibbett	2005	A new Sparassis from Spain described using morphological and molecular data	Mycological Research							Sparassis miniensis, collected in Pinus pinaster forests in Galicia (northwest of the Iberian Peninsula) is described as new species in this work, based on morphological and molecular data. S. miniensis is morphologically distinct from all others species in the genus Sparassis based on scattered flabellae, which are strongly laciniated and have an orange to rose-purplish basis. The basidiospores are relatively large in this species and the sporadic presence of clamp connections is restricted to subhymenial hyphae. Molecular data from lsu-rDNA, ITS and partial RPB2 gene suggest a close relationship between new species S. miniensis and S. brevipes, another European species producing large fruiting bodies but no clamp connections.
S1279	P. Chaverri;J. B. Bischoff;M. Liu;K. T. Hodge	2005	Hypocrella macrostroma, a new species of Hypocrella and its phylogenetic relationships to other species with large stromata	Mycological Research							Two specimens of a new species of Hypocrella with large stromata were collected in Bolivia and Costa Rica. The morphology of the new species, H. macrostroma, was compared to that of other species with large stromata, i.e. H. africana, H. gaertneriana, and H. schizostachyi. In addition, phylogenetic analyses of partial sequences from three genes, large subunit nuclear ribosomal DNA, translation elongation factor 1-á, and RNA polymerase II subunit 1, were conducted to determine the relationships of the new species to other species of Hypocrella/Aschersonia. Phylogenetic analyses show that H. macrostroma belongs to a strongly supported clade that includes H. africana, H. schizostachyi, and Aschersonia insperata, whereas other Hypocrella species belong to two sister clades. Hypocrella macrostroma is described and illustrated, and a lectotype is designated for H. gaertneriana.
S1335	S. Hirose;S. Tanda;L. Kiss;B. Grigaliunaite;M. Havrylenko;S. Takamatsu	2005	Molecular phylogeny and evolution of the maple powdery mildew (Sawadaea Miyabe; Erysiphaceae) inferred from nuclear rDNA sequences	Mycological Research	109						To understand the phylogenetic relationships and evolution of the powdery mildew genus Sawadaea (Ascomycete: Erysiphaceae), obligate parasitic fungi of maples, we performed molecular phylogenetic analyses based on 47 internal transcribed spacer (ITS) and ten 28S rDNA sequences. Seven major clades of Sawadaea, each represented by powdery mildew specimens collected from a single or a small number of closely related sections of Acer, were identified in this study, which suggests close evolutionary relationships between Acer (host) and Sawadaea (parasite). Six- to eleven-base insertion/deletion was found in the ITS1 region, and the presence or absence of the indel was consistent within the respective clades. Because the outgroup genera Podosphaera and Cystotheca have no deletions in the sites, deletion of the sequences may have occurred during the divergence of the respective clades of Sawadaea. The seven clades were divided into two geographical groups, viz., East Asian group and global group, based on the countries of collection of Sawadaea. Calculation of evolutionary timing of Sawadaea using molecular clocks shows that the divergence of different species of Acer had happened many million years before the radiation time of Sawadaea. Thus, the close evolutionary relationship between Sawadaea and Acer found in this study might not be the consequence of a true co-evolutionary process. Powdery mildew fungi belonging to the genus Sawadaea might have had jumped on Acer spp. long after the radiation of the major sections of these trees and then expanded their host ranges according to the phylogeny and sometimes the geographical distribution of Acer.
S1225	R. Kristensen;M. Torp;B. Kosiak;A. Holst-Jensen	2005	Phylogeny and toxigenic potential is correlated in Fusarium species as revealed by partial translation elongation factor 1 alpha gene sequences	Mycological Research	109						Partial translation elongation factor 1 alpha (TEF-1á) gene and intron sequences are reported from 148 isolates of 11 species of the anamorph genus Fusarium; F. avenaceum (syn. F. arthrosporioides), F. cerealis, F. culmorum, F. equiseti, F. flocciferum, F. graminearum, F. lunulosporum, F. sambucinum, F. torulosum, F. tricinctum and F. venenatum. The sequences were aligned with TEF-1á sequences retrieved from 35 isolates of F. kyushuense, F. langsethiae, F. poae and F. sporotrichioides in a previous study, and 39 isolates of F. cerealis, F. culmorum, F. graminearum and F. pseudograminearum retrieved from sequence databases. The 222 aligned sequences were subjected to phylogenetic analyses using maximum parsimony and Bayesian Markov Chain Monte Carlo maximum likelihood statistics. Support for internal branching topologies was examined by Bremer support, bootstrap and posterior probability analyses. The resulting trees were largely congruent. The taxon groups included in the sections Discolor, Gibbosum and Sporotrichiella sensu Wollenweber and Reinking (1935) all appeared to be polyphyletic. All species were monophyletic except F. flocciferum that was paraphyletic, and one isolate classified as F. cf. langsethiae on the basis of morphology that grouped with F. sporotrichioides. Mapping of toxin profiles, host preferences and geographic origin onto the DNA based phylogenetic tree structure indicated that in particular the toxin profiles corresponded with phylogeny, i.e. phylotoxigenic relationships were inferred. A major distinction was observed between the trichothecene and non-trichothecene producers, and the trichothecene producers were grouped into one clade of strictly type A trichothecene producers, one clade of strictly type B trichothecene producers and one clade with both type A and type B trichothecene producers. Furthermore, production of the type A trichothecenes T-2/HT-2 toxins are associated with a lineage comprising F. langsethiae and F. sporotrichioides. The ability to produce zearalenone was apparently gained parallel to the ability to produce trichothecenes, and later lost in a derived sublineage. The ability to produce enniatins is a shared feature of the entire study group, with the exception of the strict trichothecene type B producers and F. equiseti. The ability to produce moniliformin seems to be an ancestral feature of members of the genus Fusarium which seems to have been lost in the clades consisting of trichothecene / zearalenone producers. The aims of the present study were to determine the phylogenetic relationships between the different species of Fusarium commonly occurring on Norwegian cereals and some of their closest relatives, as well as to reveal underlying patterns such as the ability to produce certain mycotoxins, geographic distribution and host preferences. Implications for a better classification of Fusarium are discussed and highlighted.
S1601	C. M. Ritz;W. Maier;F. Oberwinkler;V. Wissemann	2005	Different evolutionary histories of two Phragmidium species infecting the same dog rose hosts	Mycological Research	109		603-609				Rust fungi of the genus Phragmidium were investigated on three species of dog-roses, Rosa. sect. Caninae (Rosa canina, R. corymbifera and R. rubiginosa) in Germany. Two Phragmidium species (P. mucronatum and P. tuberculatum). were found and were able to infect each of the three dogrose species, although the overall infection of R. rubiginosa was significantly lower which could be important for rose breeding. Despite their overlapping host ranges, the phylogenetic background of P. tuberculatum and P. mucronatum was found to be quite distinct. Our phylogenetic analyses suggest that P. mucronatum shares a common ancestor with other rose rusts, whereas P. tuberculatum evolved from a Rubus-Sanguisorba rust clade and must have undergone to Rosa spp.
S1298	M. Stoll;D. Begerow;F. Oberwinkler	2005	Molecular phylogeny of Ustilago, Sporisorium, and related taxa based on combined analyses of rDNA sequences	Mycological Research	109	3	342-56				Combined analyses of ITS (Internal Transcribed Spacer) and LSU (Large Subunit) rDNA sequences were utilised to resolve the phylogenetic relationships of 98 members of the smut genera Lundquistia, Melanopsichium, Moesziomyces, Macalpinomyces, Sporisorium, and Ustilago (Basidiomycota: Ustilaginales). Minimum Evolution and Bayesian inference of phylogeny resolve three major groups of almost identical composition: Sporisorium, Ustilago, and a basal assemblage of both Ustilago and Sporisorium species. Macalpinomyces deserves generic rank regarding its type species M. eriachnes; all other Macalpinomyces species of our study clearly turn out to be part of Ustilago or Sporisorium. Lundquistia evidently belongs to Sporisorium. Moesziomyces, probably paraphyletic, stands basal to all other genera. Interestingly, Melanopsichium belongs to the Ustilago clade, being the only member of the ingroup not parasitizing on Poaceae. The patchy distribution of commonly used morphological characters along our phylograms points to their variability and dependence on the host‚s morphological traits instead of being valuable for resolving parasite phylogeny. New combination proposed: Sporisorium fascicularis (Vánky) M. Stoll, Begerow & Oberw.
S1306	S. Takamatsu;S. Niinomi;M. G. C. d Álvarez;R. E. Álvarez;M. Havrylenko;U. Braun	2005	Phylogenetic relationships and generic affinity of Uncinula forestalis inferred from nuclear rDNA sequences	Mycological Research	109						Based on 5.8S, 18S and 28S rDNA sequences, the phylogenetic position of Uncinula forestalis within the Erysiphales has been inferred. Although the appendages of the ascomata are Uncinula-like, i.e., unbranched with curved-coiled apices, U. forestalis is situated at the very base of the large Erysiphales cluster, far away from the "Pseudoidium clade" (Erysiphe emend., incl. Microsphaera and Uncinula) and clearly separated from the recently introduced basal genus Parauncinula. Morphologically U. forestalis differs from the species of Erysiphe sect. Uncinula (Uncinula) in having terminal, fasciculate (as in Podosphaera tridactyla), septate ascoma appendages and an Euoidium-like anamorph (conidia catenate). In Parauncinula, the appendages are also terminal, but not fasciculate, the ascospores are curved and an anamorph is lacking. This species is a basal, tree-inhabiting powdery mildew with some additional ancestral characteristics, viz., Uncinula-like appendages and 6-8-spored asci. The new genus Caespitotheca with C. forestalis as type species is proposed. We then calculated timing of radiation of U. forestalis and P. septata using a molecular clock of the Erysiphales (6.5 Å~ 10-10 per site per year in domains D1 and D2 of the 28S rDNA) and 28S rDNA data set. The result suggested that the radiation of U. forestalis and P. septata from the other Erysiphales occurred between 90 and 80 million years ago. Therefore, the radiation of the ancestral two species may have occurred in late Cretaceous.
S1318	A. F. S. Taylor;A. Hills;G. Simonini;E. E. Both;U. Eberhardt	2005	Detection of species within the Xerocomus subtomentosus complex in Europe using rDNA-ITS sequences	Mycological Research							The identification of species within the boletoid genus Xerocomus has relied heavily upon the macromorphological features of the sporocarps. However, the phenotypic plasticity and the strong influence of environmental conditions upon these characters have resulted in considerable confusion over the existence and delimitation of taxa. Here, we examined collections attributed to the X. subtomentosus complex in Europe using morphological and rDNA-ITS sequence data. In total, 45 European collections from a wide range of geographical areas and ecological conditions were included in the study. Four distinct taxa were recognised: Two correspond to the established taxa X. subtomentosus (13 collections) and X. ferrugineus (20 collections), although with wider phenotypic variation than previously accepted; one taxon, X. chrysonemus (10 collections) is described as new, and the existence of another taxon (2 collections from Italy and England) is noted but left undescribed due to lack of material. Eight collections from N. America were also included in the study, from which two taxa with a close affinity to X. ferrugineus were recognised. Further studies are underway to determine the relationship of these taxa to European counterparts. Xerocomus subtomentosus s. str. (the type species of the genus) is shown to be a variable taxon with respect to pileus colour and to the development of a raised stipital network. Variation in these characters does not support the recognition of species from X. subtomentosus. Considerably genetic variation was detected in the ITS region of X. subtomentosus, even within individual sporocarps. Xerocomus ferrugineus is a widespread, relatively common species that differs morphologically from X. subtomentosus s. str. primarily by slightly smaller spores and the flesh being white rather than having some degree of yellow coloration. Over a geographic range encompassing most of the length of Europe, the variation in the ITS region of X. ferrugineus is remarkably small. The new taxon, X. chrysonemus, currently only known from 11 sites in southern England, is characterised by smaller spores than the more widespread taxa and by having a bright, golden yellow mycelium at the stipe base. A key is given to these three taxa.
S2116	Z. L. Yang;P. B. Matheny;Z. W. Ge;J. C. Slot;D. S. Hibbett	2005	New Asian species of the genus Anamika (euagarics, hebelomatoid clade) based on morphology and ribosomal DNA sequences	Mycological Research	109		1259-1267				Two dark-spored agaric species from Asia are placed in the genus Anamika (Agaricales or euagarics clade). This result is supported by ITS and nLSU-rDNA sequences with strong measures of branch support, in addition to several morphological and ecological similarities. An inclusive ITS study was performed using a mixed model Bayesian analysis that suggests the derived status of Anamika within Hebeloma, thereby rendering Hebeloma a paraphyletic genus. However, the monophyly of Hebeloma cannot be rejected outright given ITS and nLSU-rDNA data. Thus, we propose two new Asian species in Anamika : A. angustilamellata sp. nov. from dipterocarp and fagaceous forests of southwestern China and northern Thailand ; and A. lactariolens comb. nov., a Japanese species originally described in the genus Alnicola. A complete description of A. angustilamellata, including illustrations, is provided.
S1591	J. Błaszkowski;C. Renker;F. Buscot	2006	Glomus drummondii and G. walkeri, two new species of arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi (Glomeromycota)	Mycological Research	110		555-566				Two new ectocarpic arbuscular mycorrhizal fungal species, Glomus drummondii and G. walkeri (Glomeromycota), found in maritime sand dunes of northern Poland and those adjacent to the Mediterranean Sea are described and illustrated. Mature spores of G. drummondii are pastel yellow to maize yellow, globose to subglobose, (58ˆ)71(ˆ85) mmdiam, or ovoid, 50ˆ80 x 63ˆ98 mm. Their wall consists of three layers: an evanescent, hyaline, short-lived outermost layer, a laminate, smooth, pastel yellow to maize yellowmiddle layer, and a flexible, smooth, hyaline innermost layer. Spores of G. walkeri are white to pale yellow, globose to subglobose, (55ˆ)81(ˆ95) mmdiam, or ovoid, 60ˆ90 x 75ˆ115 mm, and have a spore wall composed of three layers: a semi-permanent, hyaline outermost layer, a laminate, smooth, white to pale yellow middle layer, and a flexible, smooth, hyaline innermost layer. In Melzer‚s reagent, only the inner- and outermost layers stain reddish white to greyish rose in G. drummondii and G. walkeri, respectively. Both species form vesicularˆarbuscular mycorrhizae in one-species cultures with Plantago lanceolata as the host plant. Phylogenetic analyses of the ITS and parts of the LSU of the nrDNA of spores placed both species in Glomus Group B sensu Schüßler et al. [Schüßler A, Schwarzott D, Walker C, 2001. A new fungal phylum, the Glomeromycota: phylogeny and evolution. Mycolological Research 105: 1413-1421.]
S2122	L. Kiss;K. Khosla;T. Jankovics;S. Niinomi;U. Braun;S. Takamatsu	2006	A morphologically ill-founded powdery mildew species, Pleochaeta indica, is recognized as a phylogenetic species based on the analysis of the nuclear ribosomal DNA sequences	Mycological Research	110		1301-1308				Morphological characteristics of a powdery mildew fungus found on Celtis australis in the Indian Himalayas coincided with those of Pleochaeta indica, described from this tree species in India, as well with those of P. shiraiana, known to infect C. australis and other plant species in Asia. This suggested that the original description of P. indica based on morphological patterns was not well founded and this taxon could be reduced to synonymy with P. shiraiana. However, phylogenetic analyses of the rDNA 28S and ITS sequences determined in some Indian Pleochaeta specimens from C. australis showed that this fungus is closely related, but not identical to P. shiraiana infecting C. sinensis in Japan which served as the basis of the original description of P. shiraiana. Molecular clock analysis of the ITS region and that of the 28S rDNA indicated that the split between the Japanese P. shiraiana infecting C. sinensis and Pleochaeta sp. infecting C. australis in India may have occurred 2.0ˆ8.5 million years ago in the Pliocene and may have coincided with the formation of the Himalayan mountains and the global cooling of the Earth during the late Tertiary. Thus, P. indica is recognized in this study as a distinct phylogenetic species, although our morphological study showed that its description as a morphological species was not well founded. This is a striking example of a cryptic species which is genetically different from close relatives but cannot be distinguished from them based on morphology.
S1438	J. R. Liberto;R. W. Barreto;S. Niinomi;S. Takamatsu	2006	Queirozia turbinata (Phyllactinieae - Erysiphaceae): a powdery mildew with a dematiaceous anamorph	Mycological Research	110						The powdery mildew monotypic genus Queirozia was reduced to a synonym of Pleochaeta in 1982. Now, a re-examination of the type material of Queirozia and of other two specimens showed that Queirozia turbinata has a very distinct combination of characters which do not allow its placement within Pleochaeta. It has forked special aerial hyphae, subclavate and predominantly lemon-shaped conidia,and both conidiophores and conidia varying from grayish to yellowish-brown (a feature that appears to be unique for this fungus within the Erysiphales). This may represent the first dematiaceous anamorphic powdery midew known to science. This fungus also has hemiendophytic mycelium, a character considered almost exclusive to the tribe Phyllactinieae. The outer wall surface pattern of wrinkled and turgid conidia of Q. turbinata as observed under the SEM is different from those presented in the literature for this tribe. Molecular analysis showed that Q. turbinata belongs to the tribe Phyllactinieae and is phylogenetic closer to Pleochaeta than to Leveillula or Phyllactinia. It is therefore acknowledged that Queirozia is closely related to Pleocheta but too distinct morphologically from this genus to be accepted as a synonym. Emended descriptions of Queirozia and Q. turbinata are presented.
S1606	W. Maier;B. D. Wingfield;M. Mennicken;M. J. Wingfield	2006	Extensive polyphyly in the rust fungal mega-genera Puccinia and Uromyces	Mycological Research							The phylogenetic validity of Puccinia and Uromyces, Pucciniaceae, and closely related genera was evaluated using nuLSU rDNA sequences. Using a wide range of rust species with different life cycles and with different host specificities, Puccinia and Uromyces were shown to be highly polyphyletic and to also include representatives of the genera Aecidium, Cumminsiella, Dietelia, Endophyllum, Miyagia, and Uredo. Furthermore, the structure of the phylogenetic data did not reflect previous sub-generic delimitations based on teliospore pedicel structure, but rather suggests that at least two major lineages have evolved within Puccinia/Uromyces: Rusts with telial states on Poaceae were exclusively found in one of these groupings and those with telial states on Cyperaceae resided in the other lineage. This might suggest that the two lineages evolved in close association with these host groups in different biomes.
S1743	B. Maseko;T. I. Burgess;T. A. Coutinho;M. J. Wingfield	2006	Two new Phytophthora species from South African Eucalyptus plantations	Mycological research	111	11	1321-1338	10.1016/j.mycres.2007.08.011			A recent study to determine the cause of collar and root rot disease outbreaks of cold tolerant Eucalyptus species in South Africa resulted in the isolation of two putative new Phytophthora species. Based on phylogenetic comparisons using the ITS and â-tubulin gene regions, these species are distinct from known species. These differences were also supported by robust morphological characteristics. The names, Phytophthora frigida sp. nov. and Phytophthora alticola sp. nov. were thus provided for these taxa, which are phylogenetically closely related to P. mulitvesiculata and P. arecae, respectively. Phytophthora frigida is heterothallic, and differs from P. multivesiculata in producing stellate to rosaceous growth patterns on growth medium, corraloid hyphae, zoosporangia with a variety of distorted shapes and has the ability to grow at low temperatures. Phytophthora alticola can easily be distinguished from P. arecae by its slower growth in culture, and it is homothallic. Both Phytophthora frigida and Phytophthora alticola are pathogenic to Eucalyptus dunnii. They were, however, less pathogenic than P. cinnamomi, which is a well-known pathogen of Eucalyptus in South Africa.
S1481	M. E. Smith;J. M. Trappe;D. M. Rizzo;S. L. Miller	2006	Gymnomyces xerophilus sp. nov. (sequestrate Russulaceae), an ectomycorrhizal associate of Quercus in California	Mycological Research							Gymnomyces xerophilus sp. nov., a sequestrate species in the Russulaceae, is characterized and described morphologically as a new species from Quercus-dominated woodlands in California. ITS sequences recovered from healthy, ectomycorrhizal roots of Quercus douglasii Hook & Arn. and Q. wislizenii A. DC. matched those of G. xerophilus basidiomata, confirming the ectomycorrhizal status of this fungus. Phylogenetic analysis of the ITS region places G. xerophilus in a clade with both agaricoid (Russula) and sequestrate (Gymnomyces, Cystangium) relatives. We include a dichotomous key to the species of Gymnomyces associated with Quercus.
S1635	M. V. Sogonov;L. A. Castlebury;A. Y. Rossman;J. F. White	2006	The type species of Apiognomonia and its anamorph Discula	Mycological Research							Species of Apiognomonia and their Discula anamorphic states in the Gnomoniaceae, Diaporthales, are known throughout the temperate northern hemisphere and cause diseases such as sycamore or plane tree anthracnose. The genus Apiognomonia was described based on A. veneta as the type species; however, there has been disagreement about whether or not A. veneta is a synonym of A. errabunda. Using morphological, ecological and DNA sequence data we conclude that A. errabunda and A. veneta are different species, although very closely related, thus A. veneta is the correct name for the type species of Apiognomonia. This conclusion is based on a combined analysis of sequences from the ITS region of the nuclear rDNA for 50 isolates from host plants of eight different genera and intron regions from actin, calmodulin and translation elongation factor 1-alpha for over 25 isolates. Similarly, the type species of the genus Discula is D. nervisequa, the earliest available epithet for D. platani, the lectotype of Discula. Discula nervisequa is the anamorph of A. veneta. Based on an examination of the type specimen, we determined that the commonly used name for the anamorph of A. errabunda, D. umbrinella, refers to another species. Therefore, a new combination, D. tiliae, is proposed for the anamorph of A. errabunda. Apiognomonia veneta and A. errabunda and their anamorphs are described and illustrated. An account of all synonyms and excluded synonyms is presented.
S1629	J. P. Suarez;M. Weiss;A. Abele;S. Garnica;F. Oberwinkler;I. Kottke	2006	Diverse tulasnelloid fungi form mycorrhizas with epiphytic orchids in an Andean cloud forest	Mycological Research							Mycorrhizal state of epiphytic orchids was controversially discussed and state and mycobionts of the pleurothallidin orchids, occurring abundantly and with a high number of species on stems of trees in the Andean cloud forest, were unknown. Root samples of 77 adult individuals on total of the epiphytic orchids Stelis hallii, Stelis superbiens, Pleurothallis lilijae, and Stelis concinna were collected in a tropical mountain rain forest of southern Ecuador. Ultrastructural evidence of symbiotic interaction was combined with molecular sequencing of fungi directly from the mycorrhizas and isolation of mycobionts. Ultrastructural analyses displayed vital orchid mycorrhizas formed by fungi with an imperforate parenthesome and cell wall slime bodies typical for the genus Tulasnella. Three different Tulasnella isolates were obtained in pure culture. Phylogenetic analysis of the mycorrhiza forming Tulasnella and the Tulasnella isolates based on coding regions of the ribosomal large subunit (nucLSU) and the 5.8S subunit, including parts of the internal transcribed spacers, yielded seven distinct Tulasnella clades. Tulasnella mycobionts in Stelis concinna were restricted to two Tulasnella sequence types while the other orchids were associated with up to six Tulasnella sequence types. All Tulasnella sequences were new to science and distinct from known sequences of mycobionts of terrestrial orchids. These results indicate that tulasnelloid fungi, adapted to the conditions on tree stems, might be important for orchid growth and maintenance in the Andean cloud forest.
S1554	S. Takamatsu;S. Matsuda;S. Niinomi;M. Havrylenko	2006	Molecular phylogeny supports Northern Hemisphere origin of Golovinomyces (Ascomycota: Erysiphales)	Mycological Research	110						Golovinomyces is a strictly herb-parasitic genus in the Erysiphaceae. Host-parasite co-speciation was reported recently between the genus Golovinomyces and Asteraceae from molecular phylogenetic analyses. The Asteraceae originated in South America and latterly expanded their geographic distribution into the Northern Hemisphere. If the co-speciation between Golovinomyces and Asteraceae originated in South America, the geographic origin of Golovinomyces could be assumed to be South America. To address this question, Golovinomyces species from hosts of the tribe Mutisieae, an asteraceous tribe endemic to South America, were collected and sequenced. Results indicate that Oidium mutisiae and Golovinomyces leuceriae isolated from the Mutisieae do not belong at the base of the Golovinomyces tree. Instead, they are situated separately within two different clades of Golovinomyces isolates from the Northern Hemisphere. Therefore, the tribe Mutisieae is not the most early host of Golovinomyces. Present results suggest that Golovinomyces originated in the Northern Hemisphere, and not in South America. The new species Oidium reginae for the previous O. mutisiae on Mutisia decurrens is proposed.
S1586	A. M. C. Tang;J. Fournier;R. Jeewon;K. D. Hyde	2006	Phylogenetic relationships of Nemania plumbea sp. nov. and related taxa based on ribosomal ITS and RPB2 sequences	Mycological Research							During a survey fungal diversity of xylariaceous fungi in Thailand, a new Nemania species, N. plumbea, was identified. Nemania plumbea is characterized by soft-textured grey stromata on a persistent mat of white hyphae, pale brown ascospores with a short germ slit on the more convex side. It also produces Geniculosporium-like anamorph in culture. In order to evaluate its phylogenetic relationships among related species and genera, ITS-5.8S rDNA and RPB2 were analyzed separately and simultaneously. Results from the phylogenetic analyses indicate that there is close phylogenetic association between N. plumbea and N. aenea. A preliminary account into the natural grouping of Xylariaceae based on ITS-5.8S rDNA and RPB2 sequences is also discussed.
S1539	M. Thines;M. Goeker;O. Spring;F. Oberwinkler	2006	A revision of Bremia graminicola	Mycological Research							Bremia graminicola (Chromista, Peronosporales) is a common downy mildew pathogen of Arthraxon spp. (Poaceae) in Central to East Asia and the only species of Bremia parasitic on grasses. Despite its widespread occurrence and apparent differences in host range and morphology compared with other species of the genus, its placement in Bremia has not been challenged for the past 90 y. Its current taxonomic position is revised based on sporangiophore morphology and ultrastructure, haustorium morphology, and nu-rDNA sequence analysis. Haustorium morphology and sporangiophore ultrastructure indicate that B. graminicola is not a member of the genus Bremia, which shows affinities to Plasmopara and Paraperonospora. Based on haustorium morphology, B. graminicola appears to be more closely related to Viennotia oplismeni, although the sporangiophore morphology is strikingly different between these two taxa. This is supported by molecular analyses based on a near-representative sample of nuLSU rDNA sequences of downy mildew genera, whereby B. graminicola is revealed as the sister taxon of V. oplismeni with 100 % BS support under all phylogenetic optimality criteria applied. Relationships of this clade to other groups are less clear. However, network and reduced-consensus analyses show that this lack of resolution is mainly due to the ambiguous molecular affinities of Sclerospora graminicola. Omitting this highly divergent taxon results in considerable support for a clade comprised of taxa with globose to pyriform haustoria, including B. lactucae, and for the sister-group relationship of B. graminicola and V. oplismeni with Hyaloperonospora. Consequently, a new genus, Graminivora, is described to accommodate B. graminicola.
S1445	H. Voglmayr;J. Fatehi;O. Constantinescu	2006	Revision of Plasmopara (Chromista, Peronosporales) parasitic on Geraniaceae	Mycological Research	110		633-645				Following a phenetic and phylogenetic analysis, five species of Plasmopara are recognized on Geraniaceae: Pl. pusilla and Pl. geranii-sylvatici in Eurasia, Pl. geranii in North America, Pl. praetermissa sp. nov. in Eurasia and North America, and Pl. wilsonii sp. nov. in North America and Far East Asia. Both the D1/D2 domains of the nLSU-rDNA and the complete ITS1-5.8S rDNA-ITS2 region were analysed with maximum parsimony and Bayesian methods to reveal phylogenetic relationships of the species. All species formed highly supported monophyletic lineages, which is corroborated by their distinct morphology. A key for identification, detailed descriptions, illustrations, and data on distribution are provided.
S1407	H. Voglmayr;A. Riethmüller	2006	Phylogenetic relationships of Albugo species (white blister rusts) based on LSU rDNA sequence and oospore data	Mycological Research	110						Phylogenetic maximum parsimony and Bayesian analyses of 60 collections belonging to 12 species of Albugo (Peronosporales) and two species of Pythium (Pythiales) were performed using nuclear large subunit ribosomal DNA sequences containing the D1 and D2 regions. These data were supplemented with detailed light and scanning electron microscopical analyses of oospore morphology, and the morphological data of insufficiently studied taxa (e. g. A. caryophyllacearum, A. gomphrenae) are revised. Molecular data revealed two main clades: one containing the collections from hosts belonging to the Caryophyllales and Asteraceae, and the other containing the collections from hosts belonging to the Brassicaceae and Convolvulaceae. Separation into these two clades was also corroborated by oospore morphology. Whereas the Albugo collections from Caryophyllales did not form a monophyletic lineage, the collections originating from Brassicaceae, Convolvulaceae and Asteraceae each formed highly supported monophyletic clades. According to DNA sequence data and oospore morphology, the host genus Amaranthus harbors two distinct species, Albugo amaranthi and Albugo bliti. The DNA sequence data further indicate that Albugo candida and Albugo tragopogonis each may consist of several distinct lineages, but additional data need to be collected before further taxonomic conclusions can be made.
S1566	H. Voglmayr;C. Yule	2006	Polyancora globosa gen. et sp. nov., an aeroaquatic fungus from Malaysian peat swamp forests	Mycological Research	110						During an investigation of submerged leaves and twigs sampled from tropical peat swamp forests located in Peninsular Malaysia, an anamorphic fungus not attributable to a described genus was detected and isolated in pure culture. Conidial ontogeny was thoroughly studied and illustrated both with light and scanning electron microscopy, which revealed a unique conidial morphology. Analysis of partial nuLSU rDNA and ITS data revealed a phylogenetic position within the Xylariales (Ascomycota), but family affiliation remained unclear.
S1865	V. Andjic;P. A. Barber;A. J. Carnegie;G. E. S. J. Hardy;M. J. Wingfield;T. I. Burgess	2007	Phylogenetic reassessment supports accommodation of Phaeophleospora and Colletogloeopsis from eucalypts in Kirramyces	Mycological Research	111	10	1184-1198	10.1016/j.mycres.2007.07.003			Species of Phaeophleospora are anamorphs of Mycosphaerella and they include some of the most serious foliar pathogens of Eucalyptus spp. grown in plantations world-wide. Pathogens assigned to this genus and occurring on Eucalyptus spp. were previously treated in Kirramyces and they are also phylogenetically closely related to other anamorphs of Mycosphaerella residing in the genus Colletogloeopsis. The primary aim of this study was to consider the appropriate taxonomic placement of these species. To achieve this goal, morphological characteristics and DNA sequence data for the ITS and translation EF1-á gene regions were used to compare the type species P. eugeniae, Phaeophleospora spp. and Colletogloeopsis spp. occurring on eucalypts, using ex-type cultures and herbarium specimens. Phylogenetic data and morphological comparisons supported the separation of P. eugeniae from Phaeophleospora species occurring on eucalypts. The name Phaeophleospora is retained for P. eugeniae and the name Kirramyces is resurrected for the species occurring on eucalypts (genera Eucalyptus, Corymbia and Angophora). Sequence data from the type specimens of two previously described species of Kirramyces, K. lilianiae and K. delegatensis, show they reside in a clade with other Kirramyces spp. Morphological and DNA sequence comparisons also showed that there is considerable overlap between species of Phaeophleospora and Colletogloeopsis from eucalypts. Based on these findings, Colletogloeopsis is reduced to synonymy with the older Kirramyces and the description of Kirramyces is emended to include species with aseptate as well as multiseptate conidia produced in acervuli or pycnidia. Two new species of Kirramyces, K. angophorae and K. corymbiae, are also described.
S1611	T. K. Arun Kumar;G. Celio;P. B. Matheny;D. J. McLaughlin;D. S. Hibbett;P. Manimohan	2007	Phylogenetic relationships of Auriculoscypha based on ultrastructural and molecular studies	Mycological Research	111	3	268-274	10.1016/j.mycres.2006.12.003			The phylogeny of Auriculoscypha anacardiicola, a symbiont of scale insects in India, is investigated using subcellular characters and by employing maximum parsimony and Bayesian analyses of combined nLSU-rDNA, nSSU-rDNA and 5.8S rRNA sequence data. It has simple septa with a pulley-wheel-shaped pore plug, which is diagnostic of phytoparasitic Urediniomycetidae members. The rupture of the outer hyphal cell wall layer at branching, a unique phenomenon noted in some simple septate heterobasidiomycetes is observed and this seems to involve enzymatic degradation of the outer wall layer. The septal ultrastructure of A. anacardiicola is similar to that in the genus Septobasidium. The close relationship to Septobasidium is also confirmed by rDNA sequence analyses. The polyphyletic nature of the order Platygloeales, noted in earlier studies, is evident from the present molecular analysis as well. The placement of Auriculoscypha in the Platygloeales can no longer be justified and both ultrastructural and molecular evidence strongly support the placement of Auriculoscypha in the Septobasidiales.
S1908	Y. Balci;S. Balci;J. E. Blair;S. Y. Park;S. Kang;W. L. MacDonald	2007	Phytophthora quercetorum sp. nov., a novel species isolated from eastern and north-central US oak forest soils	Mycological Research							Isolates belonging to a novel Phytophthora species were frequently recovered during an oak forest-soil survey of Phytophthora species in eastern and north central US in 2004. The species was isolated using an oak leaf baiting method from rhizosphere soil samples collected from Quercus rubra, Q. macrocarpa and Q. phellos. This species is formally designated as P. quercetorum. It is homothallic and has aplerotic oogonia and paragynous antheridia. It produces papillate sporangia (occasionally bipapillate) of ovoid-elongated shapes. Its temperature optimum for growth is ca. 22.5 °C with the upper limit of ca. 32.5 °C. P. quercetorum differs from the morphologically related P. quercina, in producing distinct submerged colony-patterns, different growth-temperature requirements, and oogonial shapes and sizes. Phylogenetic analyses using seven nuclear loci supported P. quercetorum as a novel species within Clade 4, closely related to P. arecae, P. palmivora, P. megakarya, and P. quercina. P. quercetorum was pathogenic to root and stem tissues of various oak species when inoculated artificially.
S1708	A. J. Carnegie;T. I. Burgess;V. Beilharz;M. J. Wingfield	2007	New species of Mycosphaerella from Myrtaceae in plantations and native forests in eastern Australia	Mycological Research							The majority of species of Mycosphaerella from eucalypts (Eucalyptus, Corymbia and Angophora) in Australia have been recorded only from trees growing in plantations. This illustrates a bias in research during the course of the past two decades towards commercial enterprise and it emphasises a lack of understanding of the occurrence of these important fungi under natural conditions. Surveys of foliar fungi in native forests in eastern Australia, as well as adjacent plantations, have thus been initiated in recent years. In this study, we describe four new species of Mycosphaerella from Eucalyptus spp. as well as other Myrtaceae. Mycosphaerella tumulosa sp. nov. (anamorph: Pseudocercospora tumulosa sp. nov.) was found on more than seven species of Eucalyptus and Corymbia in native forests and plantations in north-east New South Wales and south-east Queensland and appears to be relatively common, although not damaging on these trees. Mycosphaerella multiseptata sp. nov. was recorded from several locations on species of Angophora in native forests and amenity plantings. Mycosphaerella pseudovespa sp. nov. was found in one location in native forest on E. biturbinata. The first species of Mycosphaerella to be described from Syncarpia, M. syncarpiae sp. nov., was found in native forests in numerous locations from Sydney through to north-east New South Wales.
S1687	Y. J. Choi;S. B. Hong;H. D. Shin	2007	Re-consideration of Peronospora farinosa infecting Spinacia oleracea as distinct species, Peronospora effusa	Mycological Research							Downy mildew is probably the most widespread and potentially destructive disease of spinach (Spinacia oleracea) worldwide. The causal agent of downy mildew on various plants of Chenopodiaceae, including spinach, is currently regarded as a single species, Peronospora farinosa. In the present study, ITS rDNA sequence and morphological data demonstrated that P. farinosa from Spinacia oleracea is distinct from downy mildew of other chenopodiaceous hosts. A total of 58 specimens of spinach were collected or loaned from 17 countries of Asia, Europe, Oceania, North and South America, and all specimens formed a distinct monophyletic group. No intercontinental genetic variation of ITS rDNA was found within Peronospora accessions causing spinach downy mildew disease worldwide. Phylogenetic trees supported recognition of Peronospora from spinach as a separate species. In microscopic examination, Peronospora specimens from Spinacia also revealed morphological differences from P. farinosa specimens from Atriplex, Beta, and Chenopodium. Consequently, the name Peronospora effusa should be reinstated for the downy mildew fungus on spinach. A specimen among the original collections of Peronospora effuse was designated as lectotype here.
S1861	G. García-Blázquez;M. Göker;H. Voglmayr;M. P. Martín;M. T. Tellería;F. Oberwinkler	2007	Phylogeny of Peronospora parasitic of Fabaceae based on internal transcribed spacer sequences	Mycological Research							Species concepts are a notoriously difficult taxonomic problem in plant-parasitic fungal-like organisms such as downy mildews (Peronosporomycetes, Peronosporales). This is particularly evident in the largest downy mildew genus, Peronospora, which contains a number of economically important pathogens. Here, we investigate relationships of Peronospora species infecting Fabaceae (angiosperms, Rosidae) originating from various collections from different species of host plants and from different European locations by molecular phylogenetic analysis of internal transcribed spacer (ITS) sequences. Molecular trees were inferred with maximum likelihood (ML), maximum parsimony (MP) and Bayesian methods and rooted with Pseudoperonospora. As in other downy mildew groups, molecular data mainly support the use of narrow species delimitations and host range as a taxonomic marker. Fabaceae parasites appear to be subdivided into a number of lineages displaying a considerable degree of host specialization with respect to both host genera as well as host subgenera or species. The number of repeats of a repetitive part of the ITS1 is, within limits, characteristic of subgroups within the cluster of Trifolium parasites. We reveal new hosts for Peronospora found on the Iberian Peninsula.
S1819	K. Hirata;M. Kusaba;I. Chuma;J. Osue;H. Nakayashiki;S. Mayama;Y. Tosa	2007	Speciation in Pyricularia inferred from multilocus phylogenetic analysis	Mycological Research							Pyricularia isolates from various host plants were subjected to a multilocus phylogenetic analysis based on rDNA-ITS, actin, _-tubulin, and calmodulin loci. A combined gene tree resolved seven groups with 100% bootstrap support, suggesting that they are monophyletic groups supported concordantly by all four loci. By incorporating biological and morphological species criteria, each of the seven groups was considered to be a current species. However, phylogenetic relationships among these species were unresolved in the single-gene trees and in the combined tree. Furthermore, the transition from concordance to conflict occurred more than once in the combined gene tree. They were interpreted by assuming that Pyricularia has evolved through repeating species radiation. The transition point other than the current species limit was considered to be the limit of the former species.
S1777	K. Hoffmann;S. Discher;K. Voigt	2007	Revision of the genus Absidia (Mucorales, Zygomycetes) based on physiological, phylogenetic and morphological characters: Thermotolerant Absidia spp. form a coherent group, the Mycocladiaceae fam. nov	Mycological Research							The genus Absidia comprise ubiquitously distributed soil fungi inhabiting different growth temperature optima ranging from 20 °C to 42 °C. While few of the mesophilic species imply biotechnological importance in biotransformation of steroids or as producers of rennin-like components, the species with higher growth temperature optima are of clinical relevance as opportunistic human pathogens. The aim of this study was to investigate the phylogenetic relationships between these species and to establish a revision of their systematics. For this purpose single and combined genealogies based on distance, maximum parsimony, maximum likelihood and Bayesian analyses of aligned nucleotide sequences of the nuclear-encoded genes for actin (act) and for the 5.8S ribosomal RNA flanked by the internal transcribed spacer (ITS) regions 1 and 2 (comprising 807 and 828 characters, respectively) of 16 Absidia species were reconstructed. The phylogenetic reconstructions suggest a trichotomy of the Absidia genus consisting of a mesophilic, a fast-growing thermotolerant and a slowly-growing mycoparasitic Absidia group. The trichotomous phylogenetic grouping is concordant with the morphology of the zygospores, which are zygotes resulting from sexual conjugation between two compatible mating partners. Whereas the mesophilic group comprises the majority of absidiaceaeous species forming sterile hairˆlike, mycelial appendages on the suspensors of their zygospores, the thermotolerant group is characterised by the formation of smooth-walled and the mycoparasitic group, namely Absidia parricida and A. zychae, by Mucor-like rough-walled zygospores. Based on the phylogenetic coherence of mesophilic and thermotolerant Absidia species, we propose to separate both groups into two distinct genera, Absidia for the mesophilic Absidia species resembling the Absidiaceae and Mycocladus for the thermotolerant species A. corymbifera, A. blakesleeana and A. hyalospora. Because Mycocladus is physiologically, phylogenetically and morphologically distinct from the Absidiaceae sensu stricto we suggest to classify them into a separate family, the Mycocladiaceae fam. nov. which comprises the three species Mycocladus corymbifer, M. blakesleeanus and M. hyalospora.
S1757	K. Kageyama;M. Senda;T. Asano;H. Suga;K. Ishiguro	2007	Heterogeneity of the internal transcribed spacer region of ribosomal DNA in Pythium helicoides	Mycological Research							Heterogeneity of the rDNA ITS region in Pythium helicoides and the phylogenetic relationship between Pythium helicoides and closely related species were investigated. In PCR-RFLP analysis of the rDNA ITS region of all P. helicoides isolates investigated, including the type culture, intraspecific variation was found at the Hha I site. The total length of fragments was longer than before cutting, indicating sequence heterogeneity within isolates. Digestion of the cloned rDNA ITS region with Hha I revealed polymorphisms among and within single zoospore isolates, and variability of of the rDNA ITS region was also present among the clones derived from the same isolate. To test whether the rDNA ITS region of closely related species and other regions in the genome of P. helicoides are also variable, the ITS region of P. ultimum and the cytochrome oxydase II gene encoded in mitochondria were sequenced. This revealed only a low intraspecific variability in the sequences of both species but not intra-isolate variation. In the phylogenic tree based on the rDNA ITS sequences, all clones of P. helicoides formed one large clade which was distinct from the clades comprising morphologically similar species such as P. oedochilum and P. ostracodes, and closely related to P. chamaehyphon rather than the other species.
S1829	T. Læssøe;K. Hansen	2007	Truffle trouble ÀÜ what happened to the Tuberales?	Mycological Research							An overview of truffles now considered to belong in the Pezizales, but formerly treated in the Tuberales, is presented, including a discussion on morphological and biological traits characterizing this form group. Accepted genera are listed and discussed according to a system based on molecular results combined with morphological characters. Phylogenetic analyses of LSU rDNA sequences from 55 hypogeous and 139 epigeous taxa of Pezizales were performed to examine their relationships. Parsimony, maximum likelihood and Bayesian analyses of these sequences indicate that the truffles studied represent at least 15 independent lineages within the Pezizales. Sequences from hypogeous representatives referred to the following families and genera were analyzed: Discinaceae-Morchellaceae (Fischerula, Hydnotrya, Leucangium), Helvellaceae (Balsamia and Barssia), Pezizaceae (Amylascus, Cazia, Eremiomyces, Hydnotryopsis, Kaliharituber, Mattirolomyces, Pachyphloeus, Peziza, Ruhlandiella, Stephensia, Terfezia and Tirmania), Pyronemataceae (Genea, Geopora, Paurocotylis and Stephensia) and Tuberaceae (Choiromyces, Dingleya, Labyrinthomyces, Reddellomyces and Tuber). The different types of hypogeous ascomata were found within most major evolutinary lines often nesting close to apothecial species. Although the Pezizaceae traditionally have been defined mainly on the presence of amyloid reactions of the ascus wall several truffles appear to have lost this character. The value of the number of nuclei in mature ascospores as a delimiting family character is evaluated and found to be more variable than generally assumed.
S1830	T. Læssøe;K. Hansen	2007	Truffle trouble ÀÜ what happened to the Tuberales?	Mycological Research							An overview of truffles now considered to belong in the Pezizales, but formerly treated in the Tuberales, is presented, including a discussion on morphological and biological traits characterizing this form group. Accepted genera are listed and discussed according to a system based on molecular results combined with morphological characters. Phylogenetic analyses of LSU rDNA sequences from 55 hypogeous and 139 epigeous taxa of Pezizales were performed to examine their relationships. Parsimony, maximum likelihood and Bayesian analyses of these sequences indicate that the truffles studied represent at least 15 independent lineages within the Pezizales. Sequences from hypogeous representatives referred to the following families and genera were analyzed: Discinaceae-Morchellaceae (Fischerula, Hydnotrya, Leucangium), Helvellaceae (Balsamia and Barssia), Pezizaceae (Amylascus, Cazia, Eremiomyces, Hydnotryopsis, Kaliharituber, Mattirolomyces, Pachyphloeus, Peziza, Ruhlandiella, Stephensia, Terfezia and Tirmania), Pyronemataceae (Genea, Geopora, Paurocotylis and Stephensia) and Tuberaceae (Choiromyces, Dingleya, Labyrinthomyces, Reddellomyces and Tuber). The different types of hypogeous ascomata were found within most major evolutinary lines often nesting close to apothecial species. Although the Pezizaceae traditionally have been defined mainly on the presence of amyloid reactions of the ascus wall several truffles appear to have lost this character. The value of the number of nuclei in mature ascospores as a delimiting family character is evaluated and found to be more variable than generally assumed.
S1711	I. Morocko;J. Fatehi	2007	Molecular characterization of strawberry pathogen Gnomonia fragariae and its genetic relatedness to other Gnomonia species and members of Diaporthales	Mycological Research							Gnomonia fragariae is a poorly studied ascomycete belonging to Diaporthales. Originally G. fragariae was considered as a saprophyte occurring on dead tissues of strawberry plants. Recently this fungus was found in Latvia and Sweden, and it was proved to be the cause of severe root rot and petiole blight of strawberry. Thirteen isolates of this pathogen and several other Gnomonia species occurring on rosaceous hosts were characterized by molecular analysis using nucleotide sequences of partial large subunit (LSU) ribosomal RNA gene and the total ITS region. The homologous regions from relevant diaporthalean taxa available in the GenBank were also included and compared with the taxa sequenced in this study. Phylogenetic analyses revealed that G. fragariae, G. rubi, and Gnomonia sp. (CBS 850.79) were genetically different from G. gnomon, the type species of the genus, and other members of Gnomoniaceae. The analyses showed that G. fragariae and Hapalocystis were genetically very closely related, forming a phylogenetic clade, which is possibly presenting a new family in the Diaporthales. Morphological comparisons of the Gnomonia species on the basis of commonly used criteria for taxonomy of Diaporthales so far did not reveal any evident features for the polyphyletic status of Gnomonia.
S1811	J. Nuytinck;A. Verbeken	2007	Species delimitation and phylogenetic relationships in Lactarius sect. Deliciosi in Europe	Mycological Research							The phylogeny of Lactarius sect. Deliciosi was investigated employing both molecular and morphological characters. We used the nrDNA ITS sequences and an 800 bp fragment of the gene encoding glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (gpd). Results confirm that Lactarius sect. Deliciosi forms a monophyletic group within subgenus Piperites. The section contains nine accepted species in Europe, eight of which are traditionally being placed in sect. Deliciosi. Lactarius porninsis, a species with white latex that is usually classified in sect. Zonarii, also falls within in sect. Deliciosi. Some recently described species are not confirmed here (L. sanguineovirescens) or their status remains doubtful because of a lack of collections (L. cyanopus). AFLP results show a clear distinction between the closely related L. deterrimus and L. fennoscandicus.
S1933	G. S. Pegg;C. O'Dwyer;A. J. Carnegie;T. I. Burgess;M. J. Wingfield	2007	Quambalaria species associated with plantation and native eucalypt in Australia	Mycological Research							Quambalaria spp. include a number of important leaf, shoot and stem canker pathogens that have gained importance as eucalypt plantation forestry has expanded world-wide. Quambalaria shoot blight is an important disease in young Corymbia plantations in subtropical Australia. This study aimed to determine which species of Quambalaria are associated with shoot blight symptoms on Corymbia spp. An additional aim was to determine the presence and impact of Quambalaria shoot blight on Eucalyptus species used in plantation development in subtropical and tropical regions of eastern Australia. Surveys identified three Quambalaria spp. ˜ Q. pitereka, Q. eucalypti and Q. cyanescens ˜ from native and plantation eucalypts as well as amenity plantings. These include the first confirmed report of Q. eucalypti from Eucalyptus plantations in Australia. Symptom descriptions and morphological studies were coupled with phylogenetic studies using ITS rDNA sequence data. Quambalaria pitereka was the causal agent of blight symptoms on species and hybrids in the Corymbia complex. Quambalaria eucalypti was identified from Eucalyptus species and a single Corymbia hybrid. Quambalaria cyanescens was detected from native and plantation Corymbia spp.
S1782	B. A. Perry;K. Hansen;D. H. Pfister	2007	A phylogenetic overview of the family Pyronemataceae (Ascomycota, Pezizales)	Mycological Research							Partial sequences of nuclear large subunit rDNA were obtained to investigate the phylogenetic relationships of Pyronemataceae, the largest and least studied family of Pezizales. The data set includes sequences for 162 species from 52 genera of Pyronemataceae, and 39 species from an additional 13 families of Pezizales. Parsimony, maximum likelihood and Bayesian analyses suggest that Pyronemataceae is not monophyletic as it is currently circumscribed. Ascodesmidaceae is nested within Pyronemataceae, and several pyronemataceous taxa are resolved outside the family. Glaziellaceae forms the sister group to Pyronemataceae in maximum likelihood analyses, but this relationship, as well as those of Pyronemataceae to the other members of the lineage, are not resolved with support. Fourteen clades of pyronemataceous taxa are well supported and/or present in all recovered trees. Several pyronemataceous genera are suggested to be non-monophyletic, including Anthracobia, Cheilymenia, Geopyxis, Humaria, Lasiobolidium, Neottiella, Octospora, Melastiza, Pulvinula, Stephensia, Tricharina and Trichophaea. Cleistothecial, reduced and hypogeous ascomata forms appear to have evolved independently multiple times within Pyronemataceae. Results of these analyses do not support previous classifications of Pyronemataceae, and suggest that morphological characters traditionally used to segregate the family into subfamilial groups are not phylogenetically informative above the genus level.
S1928	D. H. Pfister;C. Slater;K. Hansen	2007	Chorioactidaceae: A new family in the Pezizales (Ascomycota) with four genera	Mycological Research							Molecular phylogenetic and comparative morphological studies provide evidence for the recognition of a new family, Chorioactidaceae, in the Pezizales. Four genera are placed in the family: Chorioactis, Desmazierella, Neournula and Wolfina. Based on parsimony, likelihood and Bayesian analyses of LSU, SSU and RPB2 sequence data Chorioactidaceae represents a sister clade to the Sarcosomataceae, to which some of these taxa were previously referred. Morphologically these genera are similar in pigmentation, excipular construction, and asci, which mostly have terminal opercula and rounded, sometimes forked, bases. Ascospores have cyanophilic walls or cyanophilic surface ornamentation in the form of ridges or warts. So far as is known the ascospores and the cells of the paraphyses of all species are multinucleate. The six species recognized in these four genera all have limited geographical distributions in the northern hemisphere.
S1688	M. Réblová;L. Mostert	2007	Romellia is congeneric with Togninia and description of Conidiotheca gen. nov. for some species of this genus with polysporous asci	Mycological Research							During a continued survey of fungi accommodated in the Calosphaeriales we recorded heterogeneity in the genus Romellia. Historically, four species were placed in the genus. Romellia was introduced for taxa with globose, dark, superficial, papillate perithecia, a paraphysate centrum, and octosporous asci containing eight allantoid, hyaline ascospores. The type species, R. vibratilis, was revised in our study, and its freshly collected material was cultured. The anamorph obtained in vitro matches the generic concept of the hyphomycete genus Phaeoacremonium, the anamorph of Togninia. The phylogenies inferred from newly obtained sequences of LSU nrDNA, Î”-tubulin and actin of R. vibratilis revealed that the species is congeneric with Togninia (Togniniaceae) and represents a good species. Revision of type and herbarium material of other Romellia species confirmed they are not congeneric with Togninia. Romellia tympanoides possesses immersed, subglobose perithecia with sessile asci containing eight ascospores, which during maturation produce ascoconidia filling the entire ascus. This maturation process represents a new kind of apparent polyspory known in the Ascomycetes. We introduce a new genus, Coniotheca, and a new combination for Romellia tympanoides. The species is compared to the genera Barrina and Tympanis. The relationships of other two Romellia species, i.e. R. ambigua and R. cornina, lies with Wegelina and Jattaea of the Calosphaeriales.
S1701	R. Reese Næsborg;S. Ekman;L. Tibell	2007	Molecular phylogeny of the genus Lecania (Ramalinaceae. lichenized Ascomycota)	Mycological Research							The molecular phylogeny of the lichen genus Lecania was investigated using nucleotide sequences from the mitochondrial small subunit ribosomal RNA, the internal transcribed spacer region of the nuclear ribosomal DNA, and the RNA polymerase II second largest subunit. Forty-six species representing Lecania and other genera likely to influence the phylogeny were included in the study. Phylogenetic reconstructions were carried out using Bayesian inference, maximum likelihood, and maximum parsimony approaches. Lecania, as traditionally circumscribed, is not a monophyletic genus. However, a monophyletic group containing a large number of Lecania species, including the type species L. fuscella was discovered in the analysis, and recognition of Lecania sensu stricto is suggested. Lecania baeomma, L. glauca, L. gerlachei, L. brialmontii, L. racovitzae, L. hyalina (alias Biatora globulosa), L. chlorotiza, L. naegelii, and L. furfuracea do not belong in Lecania s. str., although the latter two are closely related to Lecania s. str. Representatives of the genus Bilimbia form a well supported group, as does the ŒThamnolecania‚ group containing the Antarctic ŒLecania‚ species, L. gerlachei, L. brialmontii, and L. racovitzae. An alternative to recognizing these two genera would be a wider circumscription of Bilimbia to include the ŒThamnolecania‚ group as well as affiliated taxa.
S2121	S. Takamatsu;U. Braun;S. Limkaisang;S. Kom-un;Y. Sato;J. H. Cunnington	2007	Phylogeny and taxonomy of the oak powdery mildew Erysiphe alphitoides sensu lato	Mycological Research	111		809-826				Phylogenetic analyses of Erysiphe alphitoides sensu lato using sequences of the rDNA ITS region and the D1/D2 domains of the 28S rDNA revealed a complex consisting of several genetically and morphologically distinguished taxa, including the already described Erysiphe alphitoides sensu stricto and E. hypophylla. The ascomata (chasmothecia) of E. hypophylla are morphologically very similar to those of E. alphitoides, but the two species are easily distinguishable by their symptoms as well as the shape and size of the conidia. The fungus on Quercus phillyraeoides, distributed in warmer regions in southern Japan, is genetically clearly separated from E. alphitoides sensu stricto, and morphologically characterized by having chasmothecia with appendages consistently shorter than the chasmothecial diameter. This fungus, named Erysiphe quercicola in this paper, is also able to infect some other oak species, and it is genetically identical with anamorphs on some tropical trees of other plant. Collections of E. alphitoides sensu lato on Quercus acutissima and Q. variabilis, both belonging to Quercus sect. Cerris, are genetically distinct from E. alphitoides sensu stricto, E. hypophylla and E. quercicola. They form two genetically and morphologically differentiated groups. The hypophyllous taxon on Q. acutissima and Q. variabilis, named Erysiphe hypogena in this paper, is characterized by forming distinctive persistent hypophyllous mycelial patches, causing necrotic discolorations of the host tissue. The epiphyllous taxon on these hosts, for which the name E. epigena is proposed, differs in having epiphyllous mycelium, no leaf discolorations, and smaller chasmothecia with fewer appendages.
S1804	S. Takamatsu;U. Braun;S. Limkaisang;S. Kom-un;Y. Sato;J. H. Cunnington	2007	Phylogeny and taxonomy of the oak powdery mildew Erysiphe alphitoides sensu lato	Mycological Research	111						Phylogenetic analyses of Erysiphe alphitoides sensu lato using sequences of the rDNA ITS region and the D1/D2 domains of the 28S rDNA revealed a complex consisting of several genetically and morphologically distinguished taxa, including the already described Erysiphe alphitoides sensu stricto and E. hypophylla. The ascomata (chasmothecia) of E. hypophylla are morphologically very similar to those of E. alphitoides, but the two species are easily distinguishable by their symptoms as well as the shape and size of the conidia. The fungus on Quercus phillyraeoides, distributed in warmer regions in southern Japan, is genetically clearly separated from E. alphitoides sensu stricto, and morphologically characterized by having chasmothecia with appendages consistently shorter than the chasmothecial diameter. This fungus, named Erysiphe quercicola in this paper, is also able to infect some other oak species, and it is genetically identical with anamorphs on some tropical trees of other plant. Collections of E. alphitoides sensu lato on Quercus acutissima and Q. variabilis, both belonging to Quercus sect. Cerris, are genetically distinct from E. alphitoides sensu stricto, E. hypophylla and E. quercicola. They form two genetically and morphologically differentiated groups. The hypophyllous taxon on Q. acutissima and Q. variabilis, named Erysiphe hypogena in this paper, is characterized by forming distinctive persistent hypophyllous mycelial patches, causing necrotic discolorations of the host tissue. The epiphyllous taxon on these hosts, for which the name E. epigena is proposed, differs in having epiphyllous mycelium, no leaf discolorations, and smaller chasmothecia with fewer appendages.
S1921	S. Takamatsu;M. Havrylenko;S. M. Wolcan;S. Matsuda;S. Niinomi	2007	Molecular phylogeny and evolution of the genus Neoerysiphe (Erysiphaceae, Ascomycota)	Mycological Research							The genus Neoerysiphe comprises belongs into the tribe Golovinomyceteae of the Erysiphaceae together with the genera Arthrocladiella and Golovinomyces. This genus is a relatively small genus, comprising only four species, and having ca 300 species from six plant families as hosts. To investigate the molecular phylogeny and evolution of the genus, we determined the nucleotide sequences of the rDNA ITS regions and the divergent domains D1 and D2 of the 28S rDNA. The 30 ITS sequences from Neoerysiphe are divided into three monophyletic groups that are represented by their host families. Groups 1 and 3 consist of N. galeopsidis from Lamiaceae and N. galii from Rubiaceae, respectively, and the genetic diversity within the each group is extremely low. Group 2 is represented by N. cumminsiana from Asteraceae. This group also includes O. baccharidis, O. maquii, and Oidium spp. from Galinsoga (Asteraceae) and Aloysia (Verbenaceae), and is further divided into four subgroups. Neoerysiphe galeopsidis is distributed worldwide, but is especially common in western Eurasia from Central Asia to Europe. Neoerysiphe galii is also common in western Eurasia. In contrast, the specimens of group 2 were all collected in the New World, except for one specimen that was collected in Japan; this may indicate a close relationship of group 2 with the New World. Molecular clock calibration demonstrated that Neoerysiphe split from other genera ca 35ˆ40M years ago (Mya), and that the three groups of Neoerysiphe diverged between 10 and 15 Mya, in the Miocene. Aloysia citriodora is a new host for the Erysiphaceae and the fungus on this plant iswas described as Oidium aloysiae sp. nov.
S1896	S. Takamatsu;M. Inagaki;S. Niinomi;S. A. Khodaparast;H. D. Shin;B. Grigaliunaite;M. Havrylenko	2007	Molecular phylogeny and evolution of the genus Phyllactinia (Ascomycete: Erysiphales) and its allied genera	Mycological Research							Phyllactinia is a unique genus within the Erysiphales (Ascomycota) having a partly endo-parasitic nature of the mycelium within the host plant tissues. We constructed phylogenetic trees for the genus Phyllactinia and its allied genera based on a total of120 nucleotide sequences of the 28S rDNA and ITS regions to discuss their phylogenetic relationships with special references to host plants, biogeography, evolutionary dating, and taxonomy. The analysis of the Erysiphales confirmed the monophyly of the endo-parasitic genera, i.e., Leveillula, Phyllactinia and Pleochaeta. Phyllactinia specimens used in this study were divided into six distinctive groups and three subgroups. Interestingly, Leveillula, an obligately endo-parasitic genus of the Erysiphales, grouped together with Phyllactinia, although this was not significantly supported by the Kishino-Hasegawa and Shimodaira-Hasegawa tests. This suggests that the evolution within this group of fungi occurred from partial endo-parasitism to obligate endo-parasitism. The host range of Phyllactinia is mostly confined to woody plants, especially deciduous trees. Betulaceae, Fagaceae, Ulmaceae, Moraceae, and Rosaceae may have a close connection to the divergence of the groups and subgroups of Phyllactinia concerned. Most of these plant families are known as major members of the boreotropical flora of the Tertiary, which suggests an early Tertiary origin of this genus. A comparison of the phylogenies of hosts and parasites revealed that host range expansion at higher taxonomic levels (higher than family level) is independent of the phylogeny of plants. On the other hand, host range expansions in lower taxonomic levels (infrafamilial or infrageneric) tend to occur within a single family or genus. An estimation of the evolutionary timing using a molecular clock suggested that Phyllactinia split from Pleochaeta about 60 million years ago (Mya) in the early Tertiary and divergence of the six major clades of Phyllactinia occurred between 5 and 40 Mya during Oligocene and Miocene. Divergence within the major clades and within Leveillula occurred maybe more than 5 Mya in Pliocene and Quaternary. This is the first comprehensive phylogenetic study of Phyllactinia and other endo-parasitic genera of the Erysiphales.
S1851	M. Thines;M. Göker;O. Spring;F. Oberwinkler	2007	A revision of Plasmopara penniseti, with implications for the host range of the downy mildews with pyriform haustoria (DMPH)	Mycological Research							Plasmopara penniseti is the sole member of the genus Plasmopara parasitic to Poaceae, after the genus Viennotia had been described to accommodate Pl. oplismeni. Based on morphological, ultrastructural and molecular phylogenetic observations, it is concluded that Pl. penniseti is not closely related to the generic type and is therefore transferred to the newly described genus Poakatesthia. The view that the genera of downy mildews with pyriform to vesicular haustoria the Bremia-clade (Basidiophora, Benua, Bremia, Paraperonospora, Plasmopara, Plasmoverna and Protobremia) include species parasitic to Poaceae has therefore to be discarded. All of these genera are apparently restricted to dicotyledonous hosts.
S1867	M. Thines;M. Göker;S. Telle;M. Ryley;K. Mathur;Y. D. Narayana;O. Spring;R. P. Thakur	2007	Phylogenetic relationships of graminicolous downy mildews based on coxII sequence data	Mycological Research							Graminicolous downy mildews (GDM) are an understudied yet economically important group of plant pathogens, which are one of the major constraints to poaceous crops in the tropics and subtropics. Here we present a first molecular phylogeny based on cox2 sequences comprising all genera of the GDM currently accepted, with both lasting (Graminivora, Poakatesthia, and Viennotia) and evanescent (Peronosclerospora, Sclerophthora, and Sclerospora) sporangiophores. In addition, all other downy mildew genera currently accepted, as well as a representative sample of other oomycete taxa, have been included. It could be shown that all genera of the GDM each have had a long independent evolution history and that the delineation between Peronosclerospora and Sclerospora is correct. Sclerophthora was found to be a particularly divergent taxon nested within a paraphyletic Phytophthora, but without support. The results confirm that the placement of Peronosclerospora and Sclerospora in the Saprolegniomycetidae is incorrect. Sclerophthora is not closely related to Pachymetra of the family Verrucalvaceae, and also does not belong to the Saprolegniomycetidae, but shows close affinities to the Peronosporaceae. In addition, all GDM are interspersed throughout the Peronosporaceae sensu lato, suggesting that the keeping of a separate family for the Sclerosporaceae might not be justified.
S2320	C. L. Schoch;G. H. Sung;B. Volkmann-Kohlmeyer;J. Kohlmeyer;J. W. Spatafora	2007	Marine fungal lineages in the Hypocreomycetidae	Mycological Research	111		154-162	10.1016/j.mycres.2006.10.005			Phylogenetic analyses of DNA sequences from protein coding and ribosomal nuclear loci support the placement of a number of marine fungal species associated with a well-supported clade containing fungicolous species of Melanospora and wood inhabiting Coronophorales. Three subclades containing marine species were recovered including Torpedospora radiata plus T. ambispinosa, Swampomyces species plus Juncigena adarca, and two Etheirophora species plus additional Swampomyces species. The monophyly of these three subclades as well as a subclade containing representatives of Coronophorales and Melanospora is well supported statistically. However, relationships among the different subclades remain largely unresolved. A sister relationship for this group with Hypocreales is significantly supported by Bayesian and maximum likelihood methods. In addition to the Halospheariales and Lulworthiales, this clade, which is characterized by considerable morphological and ecological diversity, represents a third major clade of marine Sordariomycetes
S2359	K. Taylor;P. A. Barber;G. E. S. J. Hardy;T. I. Burgess	2007	Botryosphaeriaceae from tuart (Eucalyptus gomphocephala) woodland, including the description of four new species	Mycological Research	113		337-353	10.1016/j.mycres.2008.11.010			Eucalyptus gomphocephala (tuart) is a tree native to the south-west coast of Western Australia, where, in some areas, there is a significant decline in the health of tuart. Botryosphaeriaceous taxa have been isolated as endophytes and canker pathogens from numerous hosts in many parts of the world and have been implicated in the decline of E. gomphocephala. In the present study, endophytic fungi were isolated from a wide variety of native woody plant species (Acacia cochlearis, A. rostellifera, Allocasuarina fraseriana, Agonis flexuosa, Banksia grandis, E. gomphocephala, E. marginata and Santalum acuminatum), at two locations in native tuart woodland; a site in decline at Yalgorup National Park and a healthy site at Woodman Point Regional Park. Of the 226 isolates obtained, 154 were botryosphaeriaceous taxa, 80% of which were Neofusicoccum australe, isolated from all hosts at both collection sites. Four new species are described; Dothiorella moneti sp. nov, Dothiorella santali sp. nov, Neofusicoccum pennatisporum sp. nov and a species belonging to a genus only recently included in the Botryosphaeriaceae, Aplosporella yalgorensis sp.nov. The other species isolated were Botryosphaeria dothidea on the new hosts A. rostellifera, A. cochlearis and E. marginata and Dichomera eucalypti, on the new host E. marginata. None of the new species formed lesions on excised stems of their host species, E. gomphocephala or a common plantation species E. globulus. However, Neofusicoccum australe formed lesions on excised stems of E. globulus. and E. gomphocephala
S1970	Y. J. Choi;H. D. Shin	2008	Taxonomy of Bremia species infecting the Cichorioideae of Asteraceae hosts based on morphological characteristics and molecular analysis	Mycological Research							Recent molecular studies have shown Bremia lactucae to be genetically distinct and exhibit host-specific entities. However, B. lactucae is still regarded as a causal agent of downy mildew disease on the family Asteraceae, attributed to the lack of appropriate applicable morphological characters. In this study, the relationship among B. lactucae, B. microspora, B. ovata, B. saussureae, and B. sonchicola was investigated based on morphological and molecular data. Dissimilarities in the morphology of their conidiophores and conidia allowed distinction between the five species. Sequence analysis of the ITS1 and 28S regions of rDNA and COX2 gene of mtDNA were carried out using Bayesian inference and maximum parsimony. All five Bremia species were shown to form distinct clades, each of which are represented by their host genera. Conidia in all specimens germinated to produce germ tubes at apical parts and showed no constant difference in germination pattern. From these results, it can be confirmed that B. microspora, B. ovata, B. saussureae, and B. sonchicola should be regarded as independent taxa from B. lactucae. Therefore, morphological characteristics can be satisfactorily used for taxonomic investigation of Bremia species.
S2020	Y. J. Choi;H. D. Shin;S. Ploch;M. Thines	2008	Evidence for uncharted biodiversity in the Albugo candida complex, with the description of a new species	Mycological Research							During the past two years the integrity of Albugo candida as the only species of Albugo parasitic to Brassicaceae has been challenged. The existence of two distinct species parasitic to Brassicaceae has been confirmed, to which a third species was added. For the purpose of further exploring the diversity of the A. candida complex, eight Albugo specimens on Draba lasiocarpa, D. nemorosa, and D. verna (Brassicaceae) were morphologically and molecularly compared with other Albugo species. On grounds of sequence comparisons and thorough investigation of the characteristics of the oospores, especially surface ornamentation, Albugo voglmayrii sp. nov., parasitic to Draba nemorosa, is described from five specimens collected in Korea and China. By its oospore wall ornamentation it differs from the previously described species A. candida, A. koreana, and A. lepidii. The morphological discrepancy is supported by high genetic distances to other species of Albugo in ITS rDNA and cox2 mtDNA. Albugo specimens from D. lasiocarpa and D. verna were grouped with A. candida, revealing that two distinct species may cause white blister rust on the genus Draba. Therefore, the paradigms that (1) there is only a single species parasitic to Brassicaceae, that (2) oospore morphology is useful only for distinguishing between largely unrelated species, and that (3) in general only one species of Albugo may occur on a single host genus need to be discarded.
S2237	Y. J. Choi;H. D. Shin;M. Thines	2008	Two novel Peronospora species are associated with recent reports of downy mildew on sages	Mycological Research							Recently, downy mildew of Salvia species became economically relevant globally, but the taxonomy of the causal agent remains still obscure. The objective of this study is to characterize and distinguish the different Peronospora groups associated with downy mildew on sages, based on morphological and molecular data. For this purpose we compared Peronospora specimens on S. officinalis and S. plebeia with P. swinglei, including the type specimen, on Salvia reflexa. We observed that three Peronospora species are associated with downy mildew on sages, and the recent outbreak of the disease on S. officinalis and S. plebeia are associated with two undescribed species, contrasting the view that either P. swinglei or P. lamii is the causal agent of the downy mildew disease, as claimed previously by several studies. In the study presented here, we provide the formal descriptions and illustrations for the two newly introduced taxa, P. salviae-plebeiae and P. salviae-officinale. The three species of Peronospora investigated seem to infect only a specific species of Salvia: P. swinglei on S. reflexa, P. salviae-plebeiae on S. plebeia, and P. salviae-officinale on S. officinalis. Speciation may be allopatric and closely linked to the geographic distributions of their host plants.
S1941	D. Krüger;A. Gargas	2008	Secondary structure of ITS2 ribosomal RNA provides taxonomic characters for systematic studies ÀÜ a case in Lycoperdaceae (Basidiomycota)	Mycological Research							The secondary structure of the ITS2 rDNA transcript (pre-rRNA) could provide information for identifying homologous nucleotide characters useful for cladistic inference of relationships and for selecting identifying taxonomic characters whose evolutionary past may be studied. This work compares the effect of several modern nucleotide alignment strategies, including those making use of structure data, on phylogenetic inference. From both the phylogenetic analyses and comparative secondary structure, implications for taxonomy and evolution of puffball fungi are discussed. Lycoperdaceae remain insufficiently resolved with present taxon and data sampling. Neither alignment allows statistically robust phylogenetic hypotheses under any current optimality criterion. The secondary structure data at this time are best used as accessory taxonomic characters as their phylogenetic resolving power and confidence in validity is limited compared to underlying nucleotide characters. We introduce a preliminary nomenclature convention to describe secondary structure for defining consensus features. These consensus structures are illustrated for the clades /Calvatia, /Handkea-Echinatum, /Vascellum, /Morganella, and /Plumbea-Paludosa (Bovista).
S2009	N. Rungjindamai;J. Sakayaroj;N. Plaingam;S. Somrithipol;E. B. G. Jones	2008	Putative basidiomycete teleomorphs and phylogenetic placement of the coelomycete genera: Chaetospermum, Giulia and Mycotribulus based on nu-rDNA sequences	Mycological Research				10.1016/j.mycres.2008.01.002			Few basidiomycetes are known to have a coelomycete anamorph. The partial SSU and LSU of nu-rDNA of three coelomycete genera (Chaetospermum, Giulia, Mycotribulus) were sequenced to determine their phylogenetic relationship. M. mirabilis was well placed in the Physalacriaceae, Agaricales, whereas G. tenuis clusters with the Corticiaceae, Corticiales. C. camelliae and C. artocarpi form a close relationship with the Sebacinaceae, Sebacinales. Although morphologically these coelomycetes are pycnidial and with appendaged conidia, they show no consistency in their phylogenetic relationship, belonging to disparate major taxonomic groups with putative teleomorphs in the Agaricales, Corticiales and Sebacinales. Further molecular studies of coelomycetes may be rewarding to evaluate their phylogenetic affinities.
S2130	S. Takamatsu;V. Heluta;M. haverylenko;R. Divarangkoon	2008	Four powdery mildew species with catenate conidia infect Galium spp.: Molecular and morphological evidence	Mycological Research							The Erysiphaceae are a group of obligately biotrophic fungi that cause powdery mildew disease of angiosperms. Due to their inability to be cultured on artificial media, the taxonomy of the Erysiphaceae has generally been based on the morphological characteristics of fresh as well as herbarium specimens. Thus, several morphological species with wide host ranges have long been maintained in this family, even though they clearly consist of several biological species. Erysiphe galii has been known as a powdery mildew of Galium spp. Recently, the former E. galii var. galii has been reassessed as Neoerysiphe galii and E. galii var. riedliana as Golovinomyces riedlianus, along with a taxonomic revision of the generic concept of the Erysiphaceae. The present study was conducted to evaluate the validity of the taxonomic revision of the two varieties of E. galii. During the course of this study, we found that the Galium powdery mildews consist of at least four different species, viz. Neoerysiphe galii, Golovinomyces orontii, G. riedlianus, and an unknown species collected in Argentina. The latter species is described as a new species, Golovinomyces calceolariae. The three species belonging to Golovinomyces are morphologically very similar among one another, i.e. the discrimination between them is rather difficult. The morphological differences of the three Golovinomyces species of Galium are discussed.
S1886	H. Voglmayr;O. Constantinescu	2008	Revision and reclassification of three Plasmopara species based on morphological and molecular phylogenetic data	Mycological Research							Based on the results of morphological and DNA sequence (partial D1-D3/D7-D8 nuLSU and partial nuSSU-ITS1-5.8S rDNA) data, three species of Plasmopara are revised and reclassified. A species of Plasmopara parasitic on Scorzonera, invalidly published several times, is assigned to a new genus and species under Novotelnova scorzonerae. Plasmopara euphrasiae sp. nov. is segregated from Pl. densa and Pl. centaureae-mollis is revised and relegated to synonymy of Bremia centaureae. All taxa are described and illustrated.
S1919	H. Voglmayr;W. M. Jaklitsch	2008	Prosthecium species with Stegonsporium anamorphs on Acer	Mycological Research							
S2369	T. Paap;T. I. Burgess;J. A. McComb;B. L. Shearer;G. E. St J. Hardy	2008	Quambalaria species implicated in canker and shoot blight diseases causing decline of Corymbia calophylla and C. ficifolia in the southwest of Western Australia	Mycological Research	112		57-69	10.1016/j.mycres.2007.10.005			A severe canker disease has been causing decline and death of Corymbia calophylla in the southwest of Western Australia for some years, but the causal agent has never been investigated. There have, however, been historical reports dating back to the 1920s of a canker disease of amenity planted C. ficifolia caused by Sporotrichum destructor, though the description and Latin diagnosis were never published. It has been suggested that there may be links between this species and the genus Quambalaria, a group containing leaf and shoot pathogens of species of Eucalyptus and Corymbia. The aim of this study was to investigate the identity of the pathogen historically attributed to canker disease of C. ficifolia, determine whether this pathogen is responsible for the current epidemic of C. calophylla canker and if it is synonymous with Quambalaria. Surveys examined the range of Quambalaria spp. on Corymbia spp. endemic to southwest WA. Their phylogenetic relationship to Q. cyanescens, Q. eucalypti and Q. pitereka was examined using ribosomal LSU and ITS sequence data. Morphological characters were also compared. Sequences confirmed that Q. cyanescens and Q. pitereka are present in southwest WA, with the latter associated with leaf and shoot disease. A third group isolated from cankers represent a new species of Quambalaria. Comparisons of disease symptoms and conidiogenesis indicate this species is synonymous with S. destructor. The species is formally described here as Q. coyrecup T. Paap sp. nov.
S2294	Y. J. Choi;L. Kiss;L. Vajna;H. D. Shin	2009	Characterization of a Plasmopara species on Ambrosia artemisiifolia, and notes on P. halstedii, based on morphology and multiple gene phylogenies	Mycological Research	113	10	1127-1136	10.1016/j.mycres.2009.07.010			Downy mildew infections of common ragweed (Ambrosia artemisiifolia), an invasive and highly allergenic plant species, are regarded as important factors in the natural control of this noxious weed. To date, two species, Plasmopara halstedii and P. angustiterminalis, have been recognized to cause downy mildew disease on common ragweed. In this study, morphological and molecular patterns of seven Plasmopara specimens collected from A. artemisiifolia in Canada, Hungary, and USA were compared with those of P. halstedii and P. angustiterminalis from Helianthus and Xanthium, respectively. Analyses of partial sequences of three genes, namely those for the large subunit (28S) of rDNA, cytochrome c oxidase subunit II (COX2), and NADH dehydrogenase subunit I (ND1) of mtDNA, were carried out to recover the phylogenetic relationships among these specimens using both Bayesian and maximum parsimony methods. All the phylogenetic analyses revealed that the downy mildew pathogens infecting A. artemisiifolia in Hungary and North America clearly represent a distinct lineage from other Plasmopara species. investigated. The shape of sporangia and the width of trunk and branches also allowed the separation of the specimens parasitic on A. artemisiifolia from the two closely related species, P. halstedii and P. angustiterminalis. Surprisingly, the Hungarian and the Canadian specimens were more closely related to each other than to those from the USA based on COX2 and ND1 mtDNA data, although the D1/D2/D3 sequences of 28S rDNA were identical in all the P. ambrosiae specimens. This suggests an intra-specific genetic diversity in the American populations and might also indicate that the Hungarian populations originate from Canada and not from the USA. Downy mildew specimens from six host plant genera, Ambrosia, Flaveria, Helianthus, Siegesbeckia, Solidago, and Xanthium, which were regarded as hosts of P. halstedii sensu lato, represented six lineages according to the host plant genera. This result clearly indicates that the P. halstedii complex should be divided into several species.
S2432	P. Manitchotpisit;T. D. Leathers;S. W. Peterson;C. P. Kurtzman;X. L. Li;D. E. Eveleigh;P. Lotrakul;S. Prasongsuk;C. A. Dunlap;K. E. Vermillion;H. Punnapayak	2009	Multilocus phylogenetic analyses and phenotypic characterization of tropical isolates of Aureobasidium pullulans	Mycological Research	113	10	1107-1120	10.1016/j.mycres.2009.07.008			Aureobasidium pullulans is the source of the commercially valuable polysaccharide pullulan and the enzyme xylanase. Isolates are typically off-white to pale pink or black on solid media, while some tropical isolates have been described as color variants with bright pigments of red, yellow or purple. We sequenced 5 loci (internal transcribed spacer, intergenic spacer 1, translation elongation factor-1 alpha, beta tubulin, and RNA polymerase II) from 45 new isolates from Thailand. Based on the phylogenetic analyses, isolates were classified into 12 clades. Each clade showed different colors on different culture media including two clades with color variants and some clades exhibited high levels of pullulan production or xylanase activity. Colony characteristics do not correlate perfectly with DNA sequence phylogeny or the physiological characters, but DNA sequence differences rapidly identify isolates with genetic novelty.
S2430	V. N. Suárez-Santiago;A. Ortega;U. Peintner;I. López-Flores	2009	Study on Cortinarius subgenus Telamonia section Hydrocybe in Europe, with especial emphasis on Mediterranean taxa	Mycological Research	113	10	1070-1090	10.1016/j.mycres.2009.07.006			In this paper we have attempted to clarify the taxonomy and nomenclature of thirteen taxa of the genus Cortinarius subgenus Telamonia (sections Hydrocybe, Fraternii) well represented in the southwestern Mediterranean area of Europe (C. atrocoeruleus, C. bombycinus, C casimiri, C. contrarius, C. decipiens, C. fraternus, C. gallurae, C. hoffmannii, C. petroselineus, C. sertipes, C. subturibulosus, C. urdaibaiensis and C. vernus). To this end we have performed a combined study of morphological and molecular data (rDNA ITS sequences). The morphological analysis was carried out on 114 collections and the molecular analysis involved 31 of the 114 collections, including 11 type collections (types for C. casimiri and C. fraternus were not available). In addition, a study of spores under field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM) was conducted. The results of the combined analysis allowed us to asign the studied material to five species (C. casimiri s.l., C. decipiens s.l., C. gallurae, C. subturibulosus s.l. and C. vernus s.l.). Thus, all collections from more continental areas, which were originally identified as six different taxa (C. atrocoeruleus, C. contrarius, C. decipiens, C. fraternus, C. sertipes, C. flexipes fo. sertipes) corresponded to C. decipiens sensu lato, a widely distributed, genetically and morphologically variable species. Cortinarius casimiri is also found in such habitats, but it is confirmed as distinct taxon. Collections from Mediterranean sclerophyllous communities correspond to C. gallurae, C. vernus sensu lato and C. subturibulosus sensu lato. Due to close phylogenetic relationships we propose the new combinations C. casimiri var. hoffmannii (= C. decipiens var. hoffmannii non C. hoffmannii) and C. subturibulosus var. bombycinus (= C. bombycinus), and the new variety C. vernus var. nevadavernus (= C. vernus H. Lindstr. & Melot sensu auct.).
S2476	Y. Ota;T. Hattori;M. T. Banik;G. Hagedorn;K. Sotome;S. Tokuda;Y. Abe	2009	The genus Laetiporus (Basidiomycota, Polyporales) in East Asia	Mycological Research	113	11	1283-1300	10.1016/j.mycres.2009.08.014			Relationships among East Asian, North American and European Laetiporus sulphureus s. lat., a cosmopolitan brown rot species complex, were assessed with phylogenetic analyses and incompatibility tests. Three East Asian taxa, Laetiporus cremeiporus sp. nov., Laetiporus montanus and Laetiporus versisporus, are described and illustrated as well as compared with related taxa from Southeast Asia, North America and Europe. Phylogenetic analyses showed that L. cremeiporus and L. versisporus are clearly distinct species among Laetiporus taxa. The three conifer inhabiting species, Laetiporus conifericola, Laetiporus huroniensis and L. montanus, are closely related to each other. The European population of L. montanus exhibits two sequence variants of the EF1a: one is the same as observed in L. sulphureus in Europe and the other is that observed in East Asian population of L. montanus. A key to the known species of Laetiporus in the northern hemisphere is provided.
S2394	J. De Gruyter;M. M. Aveskamp;J. H. C. Woudenberg;G. J. M. Verkley;J. Z. Groenewald;P. W. Crous	2009	Molecular phylogeny of Phoma and allied anamorph genera: Towards a reclassification of the Phoma complex	Mycological Research	113	4	508-519	10.1016/j.mycres.2009.01.002			The present generic concept of Phoma is broadly defined, with nine sections being recognised based on morphological characters. Teleomorph states of Phoma have been described in the genera Didymella, Leptosphaeria, Pleospora and Mycosphaerella, indicating that Phoma anamorphs represent a polyphyletic group. In an attempt to delineate generic boundaries,representative strains of the various Phoma sections and allied coelomycetous genera wereincluded for study. Sequence data of the 18S nrDNA (SSU) and the 28S nrDNA (LSU) regionsof 18 Phoma strains included were compared with those of representative strains of 39 alliedanamorph genera, including Ascochyta, Coniothyrium, Deuterophoma, Microsphaeropsis,Pleurophoma, Pyrenochaeta, and 11 teleomorph genera. The type species of the Phoma sectionsPhoma, Phyllostictoides, Sclerophomella, Macrospora and Peyronellaea grouped in a subcladein the Pleosporales with the type species of Ascochyta and Microsphaeropsis. The newfamily Didymellaceae is proposed to accommodate these Phoma sections and related anamorphgenera. The present study demonstrated that Phoma radicina, the type species ofPhoma sect. Paraphoma and Phoma heteromorphospora, the type species of Phoma sect. Heterosporacan be assigned to the Phaeosphaeriaceae and Leptosphaeriaceae respectively.
S2286	M. Thines;S. Telle;S. Ploch;F. Runge	2009	Identity of the downy mildew pathogens of basil, coleus, and sage with implications for quarantine measures	Mycological Research	113	5	532-540	10.1016/j.mycres.2008.12.005			The downy mildew pathogen of basil (Ocimum spp.) has caused considerable damage throughout the past five years, and an end to the epidemics is not in sight. The downy mildew of coleus (Solenostemon spp.) is just emerging and here we report that it was very recently introduced into Germany. Although it has been recognised that these pathogens are a major threat, the identity of the pathogens is still unresolved, and so it is difficult to devise quarantine measures against them. Using morphological comparison and molecular phylogenetic reconstructions we confirmed in this study that the downy mildews of basil and coleus are unrelated to Peronospora lamii, which is a common pathogen of the weed Lamium purpureum. In addition, we conclude by the investigation of the type specimen of P. swingleii and downy mildew specimens on Salvia officinalis that the newly occurring pathogens are not identical to P. swingleii on Salvia reflexa. The taxonomy of the downy mildew pathogens of hosts from the Lamiaceae and, in particular, from the tribes Mentheae and Elsholtzieae, is discussed, and a new species is described to accommodate the downy mildew pathogen of basil and coleus, which is the first downy mildew pathogen known to be parasitic to hosts of the tribe Ocimeae.
S2461	E. W. A. Boehm;C. L. Schoch;J. W. Spatafora	2009	On the evolution of the Hysteriaceae and Mytilinidiaceae (Pleosporomycetidae, Dothideomycetes, Ascomycota) using four nuclear genes	Mycological Research	113		461-479	10.1016/j.mycres.2008.12.001			We present a molecular phylogenetic analysis for two families of Dothideomycetes, the Hysteriaceae, currently classified in the Hysteriales and the Mytilinidiaceae, originally placed in the Melanommatales, then considered as Dothideomycetes et Chaetothyriomycetes incertae sedis, and more recently viewed as Pleosporomycetidae incertae sedis. Taxon sampling in the Hysteriaceae included 35 isolates, representing five of the eight currently accepted genera: Hysterium (6 species), Hysterographium (4 species), Gloniopsis (2 species), Glonium (5 species), and Farlowiella (1 species). For the Mytilinidiaceae, 11 isolates were included, representing three of the seven currently accepted genera, Mytilinidion (7 species), Lophium (1 species), and Ostreichnion (2 species). Phylogenetic reconstruction utilized four nuclear genes, the ribosomal small and large subunits, transcription elongation factor and RNA polymerase II subunit 2, and generated a total of 125 new GenBank accessions. Multigene phylogenies provide strong support for the monophyly of the Hysteriaceae and of the Mytilinidiaceae, both within the Pleosporomycetidae. However, sequence data also indicate that both families are not closely related within the subclass. Although core groups for many of the genera in the Hysteriaceae have been defined, Hysterium, Gloniopsis, and Hysterographium are polyphyletic, with affinities not premised on spore septation and pigmentation, implying that the phragmospore and dictyospore have evolved independently and repeatedly within the group. Glonium is also polyphyletic, but along two highly divergent lines. The genus lies outside of the Hysteriaceae, and finds close affinities instead with the family Mytilinidiaceae. It is restricted here to species with subiculate, dichotomously branched, laterally anastomosed hysterothecia, bearing acuminate didymospores, for which we propose the Gloniaceae fam. nov. to accommodate the type, G. stellatum and related forms (e.g., G. circumserpens). The genus Psiloglonium is reinstated within the Hysteriaceae, with P. lineare, as type, to accommodate non-subiculate species, with apically obtuse didymospores. Farlowiella, with one-celled papillate ascospores, is is removed from the Hysteriaceae, but remains within the Pleosporomycetidae. In contrast, despite divergent spore morphologies, the genera Mytilinidion and Lophium form a strongly supported clade, thus defining a highly monophyletic Mytilinidiaceae, adjacent to the Gloniaceae, for which we propose the Mytilinidiales ord. nov. The genus Ostreichnion, previously in the Mytilinidiaceae, is here transferred to the Hysteriaceae. It is concluded that the evolution of the hysterothecium occurred multiple times within the Pleosporomycetidae, and alone it is not a synapomorphic character state for the Hysteriaceae. The ability to perennate, and time spore discharge with environmental conditions suitable for germination, may be the driving force behind the evolution of the hysterothecium among unrelated groups, since most of these fungi occur on decorticated woody substrates prone to prolonged periods of desiccation. The following new combinations are proposed: Mytilinidion andinense (Basionym: Hysterium andinense), Psiloglonium compactum (Basionym: Glonium compactum), Psiloglonium simulans (Basionym: Glonium simulans), and Psiloglonium clavisporum (Basionym: Glonium clavisporum).
S1275	A. J. L. Phillips;I. C. Rumbos;A. Alves;A. Correia	2005	Morphology and phylogeny of Botryosphaeria dothidea causing fruit rot of olives	Mycopathologia							The taxonomic position of the causal agent of fruit rot of olives was determined from fresh collections of the fungus from central Greece. In culture it formed two types of conidia, namely fusiform, hyaline, aseptate conidia typical of the genus Fusicoccum, and dark-walled, ovoid, ellipsoid or fusiform, 1ˆ2 septate conidia that are not typically observed in Fusicoccum. A phylogenetic analysis based on ITS and EF1-alpha sequences placed the fungus within the same clade as Fusicoccum aesculi, which is the anamorph of Botryosphaeria dothidea, and the type of the genus Fusicoccum.
S1605	Y. J. Choi;S. B. Hong;H. D. Shin	2006	Extreme size and sequence variation in the ITS rDNA of Bremia lactucae	Mycopathologia							Bremia lactucae Regel (Chromista, Peronosporaceae) is an economically destructive pathogen, which causes downy mildew disease on lettuce (Lactuca sativa L.) worldwide. The ribosomal internal transcribed spacer (ITS) of Bremia lactucae isolates was analyzed for the first time. The ITS region of lettuce downy mildew was observed to have a size of 2458 bp; thereby, having one of the longest ITS sizes recorded to date. The majority of the extremely large sized ITS2 length of 2086 was attributed to the additional presences of nine repetitive elements with lengths of 179-194 bp, which between them shared the low homology of 48-69 %. Comparison of the ITS2 sequences with the B. lactucae isolates from other host plants showed that isolates present on Lactuca sativa were distinct from those on L. indica var. laciniata, as well as Hemistepta and Youngia. We suggest the high degree of sequence heterogeneity exhibited in the ITS2 region of B. lactucae may warrant the specific detection and diagnosis of this destructive pathogen or its division into several distinct species.
S2328	Y. J. Choi;C. M. Denchev;H. D. Shin	2008	Morphological and Molecular Analyses Support the Existence of Host-specific Peronospora Species Infecting Chenopodium	Mycopathologia	165	3	155-164	10.1007/s11046-007-9087-7			About 20 species of the genus Peronospora have been reported as causal agents of downy mildew disease on Chenopodium, but current taxonomy has placed the pathogens in one species complex, P. farinosa. Sequence analysis of the ITS rDNA was performed to reveal phylogenetic relationships of the Peronospora specimens from five species of Chenopodium, viz. C. album, C. ambrosioides, C. bonus-henricus, C. hybridum, and C. polyspermum. Five independent clades were grouped towards specific Chenopodium species using Bayesian inference and maximum parsimony, and shared a high level of sequence distances. The dissimilarities in the morphologies of their conidia and ultimate branchlets also supported the separation of the five groups on the species level. These results proposed that the names, P. variabilis. P. boni-henrici, P. chenopodii, and P. chenopodii-polyspermi, be maintained for the four downy mildew pathogens specific to C. album, C. bonus-henricus, C. hybridum, and C. polyspermum, respectively. A Peronospora species parasitic on C. ambrosioides was also found to be an independent species.
S2236	P. M. Duc;K. Hatai;O. Kurata;K. Tensha;U. Yoshitaka;T. Yaguchi;S. Udagawa	2009	Fungal infection of mantis shrimp (Oratosquilla oratoria) caused by two anamorphic fungi found in Japan	Mycopathologia							Two fungal pathogens of the mantis shrimp (Oratosquilla oratoria) in Yamaguchi and Aichi Prefectures, Japan are described as the new species Plectosporium oratosquillae and Acremonium sp. (a member of the Emericellopsis marine clade). Both fungi infect the gills of the mantis shrimp, which become brown or black due to melanization. The former species is characterized by its slow growth on artificial seawater yeast extract peptone glucose (PYGS) agar, pale yellow to pale orange or grayish yellow colonies, short cylindrical solitary phialides with a wavy tip, and one-celled ellipsoidal conidia. Although lacking the two-celled conidia demonstrated by the type species Plectosporium tabacinum, the taxonomic placement of the new species was confirmed by DNA sequence analysis of the internal transcribed spacer (ITS) region of ribosomal DNA (ITS1, 5.8S rDNA and ITS2). Acremonium sp., the other causal pathogen, differs from P. oratosquillae by its fast growth on PYGS agar, pale orange to salmon-colored colonies, long slender conidiophores consisting of solitary phialides with tips lacking an undulate outline, and typically cylindrical conidia. Analysis of ITS and b-tubulin gene sequences placed this fungus within the phylogenetically distinct Emericellopsis (anam. Acremonium) marine clade. Various physiological characteristics of both pathogens were also investigated. This is the first report of a fungal infection found on the mantis shrimp in Japan.
S2510	Y. J. Choi;R. Delhey;S. Danielsen;M. Lubeck;S. B. Hong;H. D. Shin	2010	Morphological and molecular characterization of the causal agent of downy mildew on quinoa (Chenopodium quinoa)	Mycopathologia	169	5	403-412	10.1007/s11046-010-9272-y			Downy mildew is an economically important and widespread disease in quinoa (Chenopodium quinoa) growing areas. Although in many studies Peronospora farinosa is most commonly regarded as the causal agent of the disease, identification and classification of the pathogen remain still uncertain due to its taxonomic confusion. Thirty six isolates from different geographic origins including Argentina, Bolivia, Denmark, Ecuador, and Peru, were morphologically and molecularly compared with Peronospora species from other Chenopodium species. The morphology of three herbarium specimens was similar to that of P. variabilis, which originated from C. album, characterized by flexuous to curved ultimate branchlets and pedicellated conidia. Phylogenetic analysis based on ITS rDNA sequences also placed the quinoa pathogen within the same clade as P. variabilis. Within the ITS rDNA sequences of the quinoa pathogens, two base substitutions were found, which separated the majority of the Danish isolates from isolates from South America, but no sequence difference was found among the isolates from different cultivars of quinoa. The present results indicate that the pathogen responsible for the quinoa downy mildew is identical to Peronospora variabilis and that it should not be lumped with P. farinosa as claimed previously by most studies.
S363	T. Oda;C. Tanaka;M. Tsuda	1999	Molecular phylogeny of Japanese Amanita species based on nucleotide sequences of the internal transcribed spacer region of nuclear ribosomal DNA	Mycoscience	40	1	57-64	10.1007/BF02465674		Amanita; Amanita javanica; classification system; ITS; molecular phylogeny 	We constructed a molecular phylogenetic tree of thirty-six specimens of Japanese Amanita species based on nucleotide sequences of the internal transcribed spacer (ITS) region of nuclear ribosomal DNA. By comparing this phylogenetic tree with the classification systems of Bas (1969) and Singer (1986) which are based on morphological characters and have been widely accepted, we examined the phylogeny of Japanese Amanita species. Our results supported the taxonomical treatment in subgenus level of Bas (1969) and Singer (1986) who divided the genus Amanita into two subgenera Amanita and Lepidella based on the amyloidity of spores. However, in section level, we suggested that subgenus Amanita should be divided into three sections (Amanita, Vaginatae and Caesareae). Moreover, our results showed the necessity to rearrange the disordered assemblage of members in the subgenus Lepidella. As for three subspecies of A. hemibapha and three varieties of A. vaginata, it is necessary to grade up their taxonomical ranks from subspecies / variety to species. It appeares that A. pantherina and A. muscaria are extremely related phylogenetically. The molecular biological technique was proven to be sensitive for detecting taxa that are difficult to detect by morphological characters.
S562	P. W. Crous;C. Decock;C. L. Schoch	2001	Xenocylindrocladium guianense and X. subverticillatum, two new species of hyphomycetes from plant debris in the tropics	Mycoscience	42	6	559-566	10.1007/BF02460955		Cylindrocladium; Hypocreales; saprobe; Xenocylindrocladium	Two new species of hyphomycetes, Xenocylindrocladium guianense and X. subverticillatum, are described from plant debris collected in French Guiana and Singapore, respectively. The genus Xenocylindrocladium has thus far been known from one species, X. serpens, which was described from plant debris collected in Ecuador. The two new taxa are compared with and distinguished from X. serpens based on morphology, cultural characteristics and phylogenetic analysis of DNA sequence data of the 5.8S rDNA with flanking ITS1 and ITS2 regions and the 5' end of the b-tubulin gene. These species are also compared with other closely related hypocrealean taxa. Present collection data suggest that species of Xenocylindrocladium could be restricted to the tropics.
S746	S. Takamatsu;H. D. Shin;U. Paksiri;S. Limkaisang;Y. Taguchi;N. Thi Binh;Y. Sato	2002	Two Erysiphe species associated with recent outbreak of soybean powdery mildew: results of molecular phylogenetic analysis based on nuclear rDNA sequences	Mycoscience	43	4	333-341	10.1007/s102670200049		Erysiphaceae; Glycine max; ITS; Microsphaera; Oidium subgenus Pseudoidium	Serious outbreaks of powdery mildew by a fungus belonging to the mitosporic genus Oidium subgenus Pseudoidium have been reported on soybean (Glycine max) in a wide area of eastern Asia since 1998. The taxonomic and phylogenetic placement of the causal fungus has not yet been determined because of lack of the perfect stage. We found ascomata having mycelioid appendages on a single leaf of soybean infested by powdery mildew. Molecular phylogenetic analysis was conducted based on a total of 14 sequences of the rDNA internal transcribed spacer (ITS) region from 13 soybean and wild soybean (Glycine soja) materials collected in Japan, Korea, Vietnam, and the United States, combined with 47 sequence data obtained from the DNA databases. It was revealed that two Erysiphe species were associated with the outbreak of soybean powdery mildew. There was 16% difference between the two species in genetic divergence of the ITS sequence. One species with perfect stage has an ITS sequence identical to that of Erysiphe glycines on Amphicarpaea and is identified as Erysiphe glycines based on the ITS sequence and morphology of ascomata. The second species, without the perfect stage, is likely to be Erysiphe diffusa (= Microsphaera diffusa), known as the fungus causing soybean powdery mildew in the United States, because the ITS sequences are identical to those from materials collected in the United States. However, we need materials having ascomata of E. diffusa to confirm the species name.
S856	L. A. Castlebury;D. F. Farr;A. Y. Rossman;W. Jaklitsch	2003	Genera of the Diaporthales: Diaporthopsis	Mycoscience							The genus Diaporthopsis was described for species that are similar to Diaporthe but have non-septate ascospores. The type species of Diaporthopsis is D. angelicae, an earlier name for D. nigrella. Molecular analysis of the large subunit of the ribosomal nuclear DNA places D. angelicae within a group that includes the type and many other species of Diaporthe. In addition, D. angelicae is similar in stromatal, perithecial, and centrum morphology to other species of Diaporthe. Based on morphological and molecular data Diaporthopsis angelicae is transferred to Diaporthe and the genus Diaporthopsis is considered a synonym of Diaporthe. A description and illustrations of D. angelicae are presented.
S874	H. Myburg;M. Gryzenhout;B. D. Wingfield;M. J. Wingfield	2003	Conspecificity of Endothia eugeniae and Cryphonectria cubensis: A re-evaluation based on morphology and DNA sequence data	Mycoscience	44	3					Cryphonectria cubensis and Endothia eugeniae are fungal pathogens of Eucalyptus and clove that were reduced to synonymy based on the results of cross-inoculation studies, isozyme analysis, cultural studies and morphology. A previous phylogenetic study on Cryphonectria, based on sequence variation in the ITS regions of the ribosomal RNA operon, also supported the conspecificity of C. cubensis and E. eugeniae, but was based on only one E. eugeniae isolate. New collections from clove in Brazil and Indonesia have become available, providing the opportunity to reconsider the conspecificity of C. cubensis and E. eugeniae. The occurrence of C. cubensis on clove was confirmed based on morphological comparisons and phylogenetic analyses of ribosomal DNA and b-tubulin gene sequence data. In addition to C. cubensis, other fungi morphologically similar to Cryphonectria species based on their orange stromata, were also present on some clove specimens. Furthermore, a smaller number of isolates, for which no herbarium material exists, grouped separately, outside both the C. cubensis and Cryphonectria clade. The presence of more than one closely related fungus on clove, raises questions relating to the legitimacy of the synonymy of E. eugeniae and C. cubensis, but the presence of C. cubensis on the type specimen of E. eugeniae supports it. We thus retain the synonymy of the two fungi but provide evidence that other fungi, closely related to Cryphonectria but not C. cubensis, are present on clove.
S870	M. Sugiyama;S. Tokumasu;W. Gams	2003	Umbelopsis gibberispora sp. nov. from Japanese leaf litter and a clarification of Micromucor ramannianus var. angulisporus	Mycoscience	44						Umbelopsis gibberispora is described as a new species in the genus Umbelopsis, Umbelopsidaceae, Mucorales. The species differs from others in this genus by ellipsoidal sporangiospores with unilaterally thickened walls. Phylogenetic analyses based on nuclear large subunit ribosomal DNA (nLSU rDNA) partial sequences suggest that U. gibberispora, U. swartii and U. westeae form a clade together with the strains of Umbelopsis ramanniana. The ex-type strain of Micromucor ramannianus var. angulisporus is found to be very close to Umbelopsis vinacea, whilst other isolates identified under the former name in the sense of Linnemann fall in the U. ramanniana subclade. For these isolates, a new species, Umbelopsis angularis, is introduced. Phylogenetic relationships among Umbelopsis species are discussed related to their attributes of the sporangial wall and mature spore shapes.
S1550	G. Sun;S. Oide;E. Tanaka;K. Shimizu;C. Tanaka;M. Tsuda	2003	Species separation in Curvularia "geniculata" group inferred from Brn1 gene sequences	Mycoscience	44		239-244				Brn1, a reductase gene involved in the melanin biosynthetic pathway, was adopted for species delimitation among members in the "geniculata" group of Curvularia species and proved to be useful for this purpose. Phylo- genetic trees of these fungal members were constructed from nucleotide sequences of this region. The so-called geniculata group of Curvularia was separated into several clusters. The conidial morphology of the members in each cluster is closely similar but clearly different among discrete clusters. The phylogenetic groups almost concurred with the morphological grouping. Thus, the synonymous treat- ment of Curvularia affinis, C. fallax, and C. senegalensis to C. geniculata in a previous study was supported. The iso- lates with warping hilum conidia were clearly different from C. geniculata and separated into two clusters. C. geniculata ATCC 6671 made an independent cluster situated near these clusters. The protuberant hilum species were located separately in the phylogenetic trees. For sound taxonomic treatment of these isolates, we should accumulate more information and retain our species determination for them.
S1181	S. Takamatsu;U. Braun;S. Limkaisang	2004	Phylogenetic relationships and generic affinity of Uncinula septata inferred from nuclear rDNA sequences	Mycoscience	45						Based on 18S, 5.8S and 28S rDNA sequences, the phylogenetic position of Uncinula septata within the Erysiphales has been inferred. Although appendages of the ascomata are uncinula-like, i.e., unbranched with curved-coiled apices, U. septata is situated at the very base of the large Erysiphales cluster, far away from the epseudoidium clade (Erysiphe emend., incl. Microsphaera and Uncinula). Morphologically, U. septata differs from the species of Erysiphe sect. Uncinula (= Uncinula) in having terminal, pluriseptate ascoma appendages, curved ascospores, and the absense of an anamorph. This species is a basal, tree-inhabiting powdery mildew with some additional ancestral characteristics, viz., uncinula-like appendages and 8-spored asci. The new genus Parauncinula with U. septata as the type species is proposed. Uncinula curvispora (= U. septata var. curvispora) is tentatively maintained as a separate species, which is also assigned to Parauncinula.
S1129	C. To-anun;S. Kom-un;S. Limkaisang;W. Fangfuk;Y. Sato;S. Takamatsu	2004	A new subgenus, Microidium, of Oidium (Erysiphaceae) on Phyllanthus spp	Mycoscience							Powdery mildew fungi found on leaves, shoots and stems of Phyllanthus acidus, P. amarus and P. reticulatus proved to be a fungus having unique morphology in the Erysiphaceae. Light micrographs of a new germination pattern are added to discuss differences to other four germination patterns of the powdery mildews. The rDNA sequences (28S and 18S regions) of the fungi found on Phyllanthus spp. formed a distinct monophyletic clade strongly supported by bootstrap (100%) in 18S+28S trees, which indicates that the fungus is an isolated fungal group among the Erysiphaceae in tribal level. Because we did not find teleomorphic state of this fungus, a new subgenus Microidium of anamorphic genus Oidium is proposed to accommodate this organism.
S1362	Y. Ogawa;A. Suda;K. Kusama-Eguchi;K. Watanabe;S. Tokumasu	2005	Intraspecific groups of Umbelopsis ramanniana inferred from nucleotide sequences of nuclear rDNA internal transcribed spacer regions and sporangiospore morphology	Mycoscience							Umbelopsis ramanniana is a well-known species in this genus. A characteristic morphological feature of this fungus is the remarkable variations in the sporangiospore shape. This implies the genetic variations occur in the nucleotide sequences of the internal transcribed spacer (ITS) regions of the nuclear ribosomal DNA (nrDNA) in the U. ramanniana isolates. The relationship between the variations of the sequences of the nrDNA ITS regions and those of the sporangiospore morphology was investigated for 12 isolates of U. ramanniana collected in Europe. Neighbor joining and parsimony analyses on the sequences suggested that these isolates split into 3 groups. Precise examination of the morphology showed that the isolates of those respective groups were different from each other in their sporangiospore shape. The present study implies at least 3 intraspecific groups exist in U. ramanniana and that the variations in the nucleotide sequences of the nrDNA ITS regions correlate well with those in the sporangiospore shape in these intraspecific groups.
S1483	M. Havrylenko;S. Takamatsu;R. Divarangkoon;U. Braun	2006	Phyllactinia chubutiana: a new species of Erysiphales from Patagonia (Argentina)	Mycoscience	47						Phyllactinia chubutiana collected in the arid Patagonian steppe, parasite on leaves of Lycium chilense (Solanaceae), is proposed as new species. A replacement name, Ovulariopsis insolita is given to the related anamorph known as Oidium insolitum.
S1565	S. Limkaisang;J. H. Cunnington;K. W. Liew;B. Salleh;Y. Sato;R. Divarangkoon;W. Fangfuk;C. To-anun;S. Takamatsu	2006	Molecular phylogenetic analyses reveal a close relationship between powdery mildew fungi on some tropical trees and Erysiphe alphitoides, an oak powdery mildew	Mycoscience	46	4	220-226	10.1007/s10267-005-0238-8			To investigate the phylogenetic relationships among the powdery mildew fungi of some economically important tropical trees belonging to Oidium subgenus Pseudoidium, we conducted molecular phylogenetic analyses using 30 DNA sequences of the rDNA internal transcribed spacer (ITS) regions and 26 sequences of the domains D1 and D2 of the 28S rDNA obtained from the powdery mildews on Hevea brasiliensis (para rubber tree), Anacardium occidentale (cashew), Bixa orellana, Citrus spp., Mangifera indica (mango), and Acacia spp. The results indicate that the powdery mildew fungi isolated from these tropical trees are closely related to one another. These powdery mildews are also closely related to E. alphitoides (including Erysiphe sp. on Quercus phillyraeoides). Due to the obligate biotrophic nature of the powdery mildew fungi, the relationship between powdery mildews and their host plants is conservative. But, the present study suggests that a particular powdery mildew species expanded its host ranges on a wide range of the tropical trees. This paper also suggests that a powdery mildew fungus distributed in temperate regions of the Northern Hemisphere expanded its host ranges onto tropical plants, and may be a good example of how geographic and host range expansion has occurred in the Erysiphales.
S1621	R. Louzan;A. W. Wilson;M. Binder;D. S. Hibbett	2006	Phylogenetic placement of Diplocystis wrightii in the Sclerodermatineae (Boletales) based on nuclear ribosomal large subunit rRNA sequences	Mycoscience							Diplocystis wrightii is an enigmatic gasteroid basidiomycete from the Caribbean. It has taxonomic affiliations with Lycoperdaceae, Broomeiaceae, and Sclerodermataceae. This study samples ITS and 28S ribosomal genes from three D. wrightii specimens to determine this species phylogenetic placement, and to determine the species closest relatives. Results of database searches and phylogenetic analysis indicate this species to be a member of the Sclerodermatineae, and most closely related to the genera Astraeus and Tremellogaster.
S1595	S. Takamatsu;A. Bolay;S. Limkaisang;S. Kom-un;C. To-anun	2006	Identity of a powdery mildew fungus occurred on Paeonia and its relationship with Erysiphe hypophylla on oak	Mycoscience	47						A powdery mildew fungus found on Paeonia lutea at the Botanical Garden of Geneva (Switzerland) was identified as Erysiphe hypophylla based on morphological observations. The occurrence of E. hypophylla on Paeonia apparently looked curious, because host plants of this species have been restricted to a few Quercus species of the family Fagaceae. In this study, we determined the rDNA sequences of the powdery mildew specimens on Paeonia and E. hypophylla on Quercus to confirm the identity of the Paeonia fungus. The three sequences from the specimens on P. lutea were identical to each other in both ITS and 28S rDNA regions and also to the sequences of E. hypophylla on Q. robur, which supports the identification that the fungus on P. lutea is E. hypophylla. However, these sequences were also identical to the sequences of E. alphitoides on Quercus spp. and Oidium mangiferae on mango. This suggests a possibility that E. hypophylla is conspecific to E. alphitoides. Further study is required to clarify whether E. hypophylla is a synonym of E. alphitoides or a distinct species.
S1746	J. F. Ammirati;A. D. Parker;P. B. Matheny	2007	Cleistocybe, a new genus of Agaricales	Mycoscience	48		282-289	10.1007/s10267-007-0365-5			A new genus of Agaricales, Cleistocybe, is described to accommodate the isolated evolutionary position of the new species Cleistocybe vernalis inferred by a previously published multigene phylogenetic study. Cleistocybe also encompasses a second species, C. gomphidioides, based on morphological comparisons with C. vernalis. Clitocybe subvelosa is confirmed as conspecific with C. gomphidioides based on morphological and ITS sequence comparisons of type collections. Cleistocybe is distinguished from other clitocyboid lineages by a combination of characteristics including lamellae that become gray in age; interwoven hymenophoral trama with divergent elements when young; strongly interwoven pileipellis with pigmented and incrusted hyphae; long, relatively narrow basidia; white spore deposit; and smooth, inamyloid basidiospores that are often inequilateral in profile view. Cleistocybe possesses a distinct or ephemeral fibrillose to submembranous veil that may form an annulus, a trait foreign to Clitocybe. Cleistocybe is known only from western North America in coniferous forests, and it appears most closely related to the ectomycorrhizal genus Catathelasma and the saprotrophic genera Callistosporium, Macrocybe, and Pleurocollybia, as well as Clitocybe cf. fellea, based on nLSU-rDNA phylogenetic analysis. Together these six genera and lineages constitute the Catathelasma clade.
S1699	I. Okane;A. Nakagiri	2007	Taxonomy of an anamorphic xylariaceous fungus from a cultured-termite nest found together with Xylaria angulosa	Mycoscience	48		240-249				Two xylariaceous fungi were isolated from a nest of a termite, Odontotermes formosanus, that was incubated in a laboratory after collecting from Iriomote Is., Okinawa Pref. in Japan. One of the two fungi was identified as Xylaria angulosa on the basis of the morphology of branched stroma produced on medium and tiny asci and ascospores having germination slit. Another fungus is an anamorphic fungus that produces up to 50 mm long synnemata from which dendritic conidiophores branch out. Unicellular conidia are holoblastically produced on a sympodially proliferating conidiogenous cell. Such morphological characters resemble to those of the genus Geniculosporium. However, its distinctive synnema formation and dendritic conidiophores do not assign the fungus to Geniculosporium or other known genera and warrant establishment of a new genus. Phylogenetic tree based on the ITS regions of rDNA shows that the fungus is nested in the cluster of the genus Nemania (Xylariaceae), whose species have mainly Geniculosporium-like anamorphs. We describe here the present anamorphic fungus as Geniculisynnema termiticola gen. et sp. nov., and discuss its phylogenetical and ecological relationships to Xylariaceous fungi, especially termiticolous species.
S1733	S. Sekimoto;K. Hatai;D. Honda	2007	Molecular phylogeny of an unidentified Haliphthoros-like marine oomycete and Haliphthoros milfordensis inferred from nuclear-encoded small and large subunit rRNA genes and mitochondrial-encoded cox2 gene	Mycoscience							The SSU rRNA, LSU rRNA, and cox2 genes of an unidentified Haliphthoros-like marine oomycete (NJM0034) and Haliphthoros milfordensis (NJM0131) were sequenced and their phylogenetic relationships were analyzed and discussed. All trees showed that NJM0034 and NJM0131 were branched before separation of the two main saprolegnian and peronosporalean clades. This data suggests that the clear phylogenetic separation of those marine oomycete endoparasites from the two main oomycete clades. Excepting LSU rRNA gene tree, NJM0034 and Haliphthoros spp. did not form a monophyletic group. On the other hand, H. milfordensis NJM0131 clustered with H. philippinensis SANK 15178, not with H. milfordensis NJM9434 in COII amino acid tree. This result strongly suggests that a taxonomical re-investigation of the genus Haliphthoros should be considered.
S1882	Y. Shiroya;C. Nakashima;S. Takamatsu	2007	Erysiphe monascogera sp. nov., an unusual powdery mildew fungus found on fruits of Styrax japonica	Mycoscience							In late September of 2005, chasmothecia (fruiting bodies of powdery mildew fungi) were found on the surface of fruits or sepals of Styrax japonica at the campus of Shinshu University, Minami-Minowa, Nagano, Japan. Morphological observations using light and scanning electron microscopes and molecular phylogenetic analysis revealed that the fungus is a new species of the powdery mildew fungi with an unusual morphology, described here as Erysiphe monascogera. Erysiphe monascogera has a single ascus in a chasmothecium, but molecular phylogenetic analysis and shape of hyphal appressoria suggest that this fungus is an Erysiphe species. Erysiphe monascogera is a sister to E. nomurae on Symplocos chinensis var. leucocarpa f. pilosa, although there are obvious morphological differences between the two species. This inconsistency between molecular phylogeny and morphology may be explained with the unique habitat of E. monascogera. Erysiphe monascogera and E. nomurae are included in a clade composed of the E. alphitoides species complex, which suggests that these two species were diverged by host jumping of the E. alphitoides species complex having oaks as major host plants.
S1920	S. Takamatsu;T. Ito;H. Yamamoto;U. Braun	2007	Sawadaea nankinensis comb. nov.: a powdery mildew fungus of Acer buergerianum	Mycoscience							The anamorphic state of a powdery mildew on trident maple (Acer buergerianum, Aceraceae), belonging to Sawadaea, has been observed since 1980 in Tokyo and other areas of Japan. A few years ago, this fungus began to produce chasmothecia in various areas of Japan, which were consistent with Erysiphe nankinensis (= Uncinula nankinensis), but apparently contradictory to the characteristics of the anamorph. Based on a molecular phylogenetic analysis using DNAs separately extracted from anamorph and teleomorph of the fungus on A. buergerianum, it could be demonstrated that sequences of this fungus are sister to Sawadaea. Due to the anamorph belonging to Oidium subgen. Octagoidium and the phylogenetic position within the Sawadaea clade, the new combination Sawadaea nankinensis is proposed for this species. The genus Sawadaea is emended to comprise species with consistently unbranched appendages.
S1942	S. Takamatsu;H. Masuya;R. Divarangkoon;Y. Nomura	2007	Erysiphe fimbriata sp. nov.: a powdery mildew fungus found on Carpinus laxiflora	Mycoscience							In March 2003, powdery mildew-like ascomata attached to fallen twigs of Corylus laxiflora in litter were found in the Mikamoyama Park, Tochigi, Japan. Both morphological observations and molecular phylogenetic analyses indicated that the fungus is a member of the powdery mildew fungi. In this study, we report the morphological and molecular characteristics of this fungus and propose Erysiphe fimbriata as a new species. Erysiphe fimbriata has large chasmothecia (200&#8211;250 &#181;m diam) with long (up to 4&#8211;5 mm in length), fimbriate appendages arising from the upper half of the chasmothecia and turning upward, and numerous asci (22&#8211;38 per chasmothcium). Erysiphe fimbriata is a unique fungus both genetically and morphologically.
S1904	E. Tanaka;C. Tanaka	2007	Phylogenetic study of clavicipitaceous fungi using acetaldehyde dehydrogenase gene sequences	Mycoscience							Aciculosporium and Heteroepichloe™N (Clavicipitaceae) are characteristic bambusicolous fungi in east Asia. In this study, we examined their intergeneric relationships based on the ALDH1-1 gene, which encodes a member of the aldehyde dehydrogenase family. In the clavicipitaceous fungi examined in this study, the nucleotide sequence of the third exon of ALDH1-1 (Exon-3) is 889 bp in length and has no insertion/deletion. A phylogenetic tree based on Exon-3 indicated that the clavicipitaceous fungi could be divided into two large groups: Cordyceps, Nomuraea, and Ustilaginoidea species formed a paraphyletic group, while the other grass biotrophic species formed a monophyletic group. This monophyletic group was further divided into three groups with high bootstrap support: i.e., species with Neotyphodium anamorphs (e.g. Epichloe™N), species with Ephelis anamorphs (e.g. Heteroepichloe™N), and Aciculosporium™|Claviceps species. We discuss the relationships among Aciculosporium, Heteroepichloe™N, and other clavicipitaceous fungi.
S1809	R. Yokoyama;D. Honda	2007	Taxonomic rearrangement of the genus Schizochytrium sensu lato based on morphology, chemotaxonomical characteristics and 18S rRNA gene phylogeny (Thraustochytriaceae, Labyrinthulomycetes): emendation for Schizochytrium and erection of Aurantiochytrium and Oblongichytrium gen. nov	Mycoscience							The genus Schizochytrium sensu lato has been characterized by successive binary division of its vegetative cells. However, the molecular phylogeny strongly suggests that this genus is not a natural taxon, because the original and recorded strains that have been identified as Schizochytrium spp. separately forms three well-supported monophyletic groups in the 18S rRNA gene tree. These three groups are clearly distinguishable by their combining morphological characteristics, and profiles of containing poly-unsaturated fatty acids and carotenoid pigments, though these are hard to be distinguished using only a single feature. Therefore, three different genera are proposed to accommodate these three groups, i. e., Schizochytrium sensu stricto, Aurantiochytrium and Oblongichytrium gen. nov.
S1885	R. Yokoyama;B. Salleh;D. Honda	2007	Taxonomic rearrangement of the genus Ulkenia sensu lato phylogeny based on morphology, chemotaxonomical characteristics, and 18S rRNA gene (Thraustochytriaceae, Labyrinthulomycetes): emendation for Ulkenia and erection of Botryochytrium, Parietichytrium, and Sicyoidochytrium gen. nov	Mycoscience							The genus Ulkenia is characterized by the naked protoplast stage within its life cycle. However, the 18S rRNA gene tree clearly shows that this genus is not a natural taxon, because our own isolates and reported strains separately forms four well-supported monophyletic groups. These four groups are clearly distinguishable by their profiles of poly-unsaturated fatty acids and carotenoid pigments, and cell and colony morphology, e.g., persistence of sporangial wall, manner of the cell cleavage at the zoospore formation, and development of the ectoplasmic nets. Therefore, the four groups are assigned to four genera including three new genera, i.e., Ulkenia sensu stricto, Botryochytrium, Parietichytrium and Sicyoichytrium gen. nov.
S2084	D. Dorakotkarn;H. Kawasaki;K. Tanaka;I. Okane;T. Seki	2008	Taxonomic characterization of Shiraia-like fungi isolated	Mycoscience							The molecular phylogeny of nuclear LSU rDNA sequences (D1/D2 domain), ITS regions and beta-tubulin gene (tub2) showed that the seven strains of Shiraia-like fungi obtained from fresh bamboo tissues as endophytes were closely related to Shiraia bambusicola and had three distinctive lineages (groups A - C). The closest group (group A) to S. bambusicola produced distinctive prawn-shaped conidioma-like structures that differed from conidiomata in the anamorph of S. bambusicola. Currently, none of the morphological structures and molecular database records was compatible with our Shiraia-like fungi. These results reveal that Shiraia-like fungi group A is supposed to be a new species that should be assigned into a novel genus/species related to S. bambusicola.
S2167	I. Okane;P. Srikitikulchai;K. Toyama;T. Læssøe;S. Sivichai;N. Hywel-Jones;A. Nakargiri;W. Potacharoen;K. Suzuki	2008	Study of endophytic Xylariaceae in Thailand: diversity and taxonomy inferred from rDNA sequence analyses with saprobes forming fruit bodies in the field	Mycoscience	49						A study of the diversity, taxonomy and ecology of endophytic Xylariaceae (Ascomycota) was carried out. In this study, we obtained isolates of Xylariaceae from healthy, attached leaves and teleomorphic stromata on decayed plant materials in a permanent plot at Khao Yai National Park (Thailand). &#12288;In addition,&#12288;strains deposited beforehand were selected in which both endophytic strains isolated from living plant tissues and saprobic strains from fruit bodies were included. Consequently, 405 strains of Xylariaceae (273 endophytic and 132 saprobic strains including identified strains) were studied to reveal the diversity and taxonomy of endophytes and the relationships between those endophytes and saprobic Xylariaceae in Thailand that have been recorded according to fruit-body formation on decayed plant materials. Analysis of 28S rDNA D1/D2 sequences revealed 21 xylariaceous species inhabiting tropical foliage at the site, and several species that are already known as saprobes appear to be among those isolated from living leaves. Furthermore, several clades that consisted of only endophytic strains were found, and some of these have no known matches in public DNA sequence banks.
S2052	Y. Ota;T. Hattori	2008	Relationships among three Japanese Laetiporus taxa based on phylogenetic analysis and incompatibility tests	Mycoscience							Relationships among three Japanese Laetiporus taxa (™eL. sulphureus var. sulphureus™f auct Japan, L. sulphureus var. miniatus and L. versisporus) were assessed with phylogenetic analysis and incompatibility tests. Gene phylogenies inferred from the internal transcribed spacer region of nuclear ribosomal DNA, elongation factor 1 ∞¿ and ∞À-tubulin gene regions suggested that Japanese Laetiporus was divided into four groups: the yellow pore form of L. sulphureus var. miniatus, the white pore form of L. sulphureus var. miniatus, and two ™eL. sulphureus var. sulphureus™f/ L. versisporus groups. A morphologically distinct species, Laetiporus versisporus, sharing a clade with ™eL. sulphureus var. sulphureus™f auct Japan, was proved to be an anamorphic form of ™eL. sulphureus var. sulphureus™f auct Japan. The ™esulphureus/versisporus™f isolates showed two divergent sequence types in each region. Some isolates had intra-individual polymorphism assigned to both sequence types. This suggests that speciation via hybridization is ongoing in the ™esulpureus/versisporus™f group. Single spore isolates from the ™esulpureus/versisporus™f group, white pore group and yellow pore group were incompatible with each other. Our results provided strong support for the new recognition of three Laetiporus taxa in Japan.
S2085	E. Tanaka;K. Shimizu;Y. Imanishi;F. Yasuda;C. Tanaka	2008	Isolation of basidiomycetous anamorphic yeast-like fungus Meira argovae found on Japanese bamboo	Mycoscience							
S2198	T. Yagame;M. Yamato	2008	Isolation and identification of mycorrhizal fungi associated with Stigmatodactylus sikokiana (Maxim. ex Makino) Rauschert (Orchidaceae)	Mycoscience				10.1007/s10267-008-0436-2			The mycorrhizal fungi of Stigmatodactylus sikokianus™i, Orchidaceae™, were isolated and identified to be nearly related to Sebacina spp. in Sebacinaceae (Basidiomycota) by a neighbor joining phylogenetic analysis based on the sequences of ITS region of nuclear rDNA. In spite of the geographically separated samplings, high sequence similarity was found among the obtained DNA sequences, which suggested that S. sikokianus might be highly specialized to the group of fungi. It is known that Sebacina spp. are saprobes or ectomycorrhiza forming fungi. The mycorrhizal fungi of S. sikokianus were regarded to be saprobic from environments of the habitats.
S2217	K. Yamaguchi;Y. Degawa;A. Nakagiri	2008	An aero-aquatic fungus, Peyronelina glomerulata, is shown to have teleomorphic affinities with cyphelloid basidiomycetes	Mycoscience							On a decayed wood near a stream, tiny cyphelloid, hair-bearing, Flagelloscypha-like basidiomata were found coexisting with conidia of an aero-aquatic fungus, Peyronelina glomerulata. An isolate originating from the basidioma produced conidia of P. glomerulata by soaking culture in water. Three additional strains originating from conidia of P. glomerulata produced immature basidiomata with basidium-like structures on the agar medium after about four months incubation. Fine structure of hyphal septa of P. glomerulata was found to be of the dolipore type. Phylogenetic analysis based on sequences from the D1/D2 regions of the LSU rDNA showed that the strains from conidia and from a basidioma clustered together in the Flagelloscypha clade and nested within the Nia clade of Hymenomycetes. The culture studies and molecular phylogenetic analysis suggested that P. glomerulata has a Flagelloscypha teleomorph, a cyphelloid basidiomycete. The molecular data also indicates that P. glomerulata is phylogenetically related to the marine basidiomycetes, Nia and Halocyphina. Thus, this study revealed that cyphelloid basidiomycetes have evolved both into marine as well as freshwater habitats by morphological adaptations of the teleomorphs in the former and of the anamorph in the latter case.
S2389	K. Sotome;T. Hsttori;Y. Ota;M. Kakishima	2008	Second report of Polyporus longiporus and its phylogenetic position	Mycoscience	50	6	415-420	10.1007/s10267-009-0506-0			Polyporus longiporus, belonging to group Polyporellus, is newly reported from Japan what constitutes also the second report of the species since its original description. This species is characterized by radially elongated pores, smooth and brown to dark brown pileus and cylindrical and slightly curved basidiospores. Phylogenetic analysis based on the ITS region revealed that P. longiporus forms a terminal, strongly supported clade, closely related to P. ciliatus. A description and illustrations of the present species and a key to the species of group Polyporellus are provided.
S2256	H. Sato;N. Murakami	2009	Strobilomyces verruculosus sp. nov. from Japan	Mycoscience							A new species, Strobilomyces verruculosus, is described and illustrated. It is morphologically distinct from other species of Strobilomyces by having a verruculose pileus with small subpyramidal scales, a long and thick stipe with small warty to appressed scales, subdecurrent tubes and incompletely reticulate basidiospores. Molecular phylogenetic analyses using mitochondrial cytochrome oxidase subunit 3 (cox3) gene support that it belongs to the genus Strobilomyces and is highly differentiated from the other members of this genus found in Japan.
S2253	M. Yamato;S. Ikeda;K. Iwase	2009	Community of arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi in drought-resistant plants Moringa spp. in semi-arid regions in Madagascar and Uganda	Mycoscience	50						Community structure of arbuscular mycorrhizal (AM) fungi in the roots of drought-resistant trees Moringa spp. were examined in semi-arid regions in Madagascar and Uganda. Root samples were collected from eight individuals of M. hildebrandtii and two individuals of M. drouhardii in Madagascar, and 21 individuals of M. oleifera in Uganda. Total DNA was extracted from the root samples, and partial nSSU rDNA of AM fungi were amplified using a universal eukaryotic primer NS31 and an AM fungal-specific primer AM1. The PCR products were cloned and divided by restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) analysis with HinfI and RsaI. Some representatives in each RFLP types were sequenced, and a neighbor-joining phylogenetic analysis was conducted for the obtained sequences with analogous sequences of AM fungi. The RFLP and phylogenetic analyses showed that the AM fungi closely related to Glomus intraradices or G. sinuosum were detected in many samples. The AM fungal groups frequently detected in the Moringa spp. might be widely distributed species in semi-arid environments.
S2282	Y. Muraosa;K. Morimoto;A. Sano;K. Nishimura;K. Hatai	2009	A new peronosporomycete, Halioticida noduliformans gen. et sp. nov., isolated from white nodules in the abalone Haliotis spp. from Japan	Mycoscience	50	2	106-115	10.1007/s10267-008-0462-0			Four strains belonging to the Peronosporomycetes (formerly Oomycetes) were isolated from white nodules found on the mantle of three species of abalone. In artificial seawater, the four isolates formed fragments such as in the genus Haliphthoros, but the protoplasm constriction was weaker, and fragments were longer, with smaller spaces between them, than those of Haliphthoros. The four strains form one or more discharge tubes from each zoosporangium. The four strains were similar, but not identical, to the genus Haliphthoros based on morphological characteristics. As a result, the four isolates were classified in a new genus and species, Halioticida noduliformans gen. et sp. nov. Phylogenetic analysis of the D1/D2 region of the large subunit ribosomal RNA gene (LSU rDNA) was performed, and the four isolates showed 100%&#8211;99.8% concordance. In the phylogenetic tree, the four isolates were not classified in the subclass Peronosporomycetidae, Saprolegniomycetidae, or Rhipidiomycetidae. However, the four isolates formed a new clade with genera Haliphthoros and Halocrusticida in Peronosporomycetes. Within this new clade, the four isolates, Haliphthoros spp. and Halocrusticida spp., were grouped in their respective independent subclades. These results showed that these were the new genus and species from the morphological characteristics.
S2325	M. A. Abdel-Wahab;T. Nagahama;F. Abdel-Aziz	2009	Two new Corollospora species and one anamorph based on morphological and molecular data	Mycoscience	50	3	147-155	10.1007/s10267-008-0466-9			Two new species of the genus Corollospora namely C. anglusa sp. nov. and its anamorph Varicosporina anglusa sp. nov. and C. portsaidica, which were isolated from the coast of the Mediterranean Sea in Egypt are described in this article based on morphological and molecular evidence. The two new species have one-septate ascospores. C. anglusa resembles C. gracilis by having narrow one-septate hyaline ascospore however they differ in ascomata and ascospore dimensions and in pure culture characteristics. Single ascospore culture of C. anglusa produces the conidia of its anamorph. V. anglusa is different from the other two Varicosporina species by having conidial branches that are filamentous, hypha-like that are disarticulating into two- or one-celled fragments. C. portsaidica is morphologically similar to C. cinnamomia but they differ in the dimensions, shape and ornamentation of the ascospores. The new taxa were confirmed to be divergent from similar Corollospora species based on their phylogenetic analyses of partial sequences of the LSU rDNA region.
S2231	S. Uzuhashi;M. Tojo;M. Kakishima;S. Kobayashi	2009	Pythium apinafurcum sp. nov.: its morphology, molecular phylogeny, and infectivity for plants	Mycoscience	50	4	281-290	10.1007/s10267-009-0486-0			During survey of the Pythium species in soils of Japan, high-temperature growing Pythium isolates were obtained from an uncultivated field soil in Wakayama Prefecture. The all six isolates showed similar morphology each other, and had complexly branched secondary hyphae, globose non-proliferating sporangia and smooth surface oogonia which have one or two oospores per oogonium. The combination of these characteristics differentiated these isolates from the other known species of Pythium. Phylogenetic analyses based on sequences of the D1/D2 region of the large subunit ribosomal DNA showed that the all Pythium isolates were clustered in a single clade which distantly related from other known clades of the genus. We described these isolates as a new Pythium species, Pythium apinafurcum, based on morphology and molecular phylogeny. The P. apinafurcum isolates infected non-symptomatically the roots of seedlings of bermudagrass, cabbage and cucumber in a pot inoculation test.
S2344	H. Kubo	2009	Isolation of madA homologs in Pilobolus crystallinus	Mycoscience	50	5	400-406	10.1007/s10267-009-0496-y			Pilobolus crystallinus shows unique photoresponses at various growing stages. I cloned cDNAs for putative photoreceptors of P. crystallinus. Three genes named pcmada1, pcmada2 and pcmada3 were identified from the PCR fragments, amplified with degenerated primers for the LOV domain which is conserved in many blue-light receptors. Deduced amino acid sequences for PCMADA1, PCMADA2 and PCMADA3 had one light, oxygen or voltage (LOV) and two PER-ARNT-SIM (PAS) domains. A zinc finger DNA binding motif was conserved in the C terminals of PCMADA1 and PCMADA3. However PCMADA2 lacked the zinc finger motif. Expression of pcmada1 was suppressed by blue light, while that of pcmada3 was promoted by blue light irradiation.
S2382	Y. Shiroya;S. Takamatsu	2009	Erysiphe corylopsidis sp. nov., a new powdery mildew fungus found on Corylopsis spicata and C. pauciflora	Mycoscience	50	6	409-414	10.1007/s10267-009-0499-8			A powdery mildew fungus occurring on leaves of Corylopsis pauciflora and C. spicata in Japan is described as a new species, Erysiphe corylopsidis. This species is characterized by less than 15 appendages on a chasmothecium, primary branches of the appendages occasionally elongated and a relatively small number (2&#8211;5) of ascospores per ascus. Molecular phylogenetic analyses based on rDNA ITS and 28S rDNA sequences indicate that this fungus forms an independent lineage in the genus Erysiphe.
S2272	S. Ban;T. Sakane;K. Toyama;A. Nakagiri	2009	Teleomorph-anamorph relationships and reclassification of Cordyceps cuboidea and its allied species	Mycoscience	50		261-272	10.1007/s10267-008-0480-y			Based on morphological characteristics and molecular phylogeny, we re-classified Cordyceps cuboidea and allied species C. alboperitheciata, C. prolifica and Ophiocordyceps ryogamiensis. We confirmed their teleomorph-anamorph relationships and revealed that these four species have Hirsutella-like anamorphs with differences in morphology between them. By analyzing their molecular phylogeny inferred from DNA sequences of internal transcribed spacer (ITS) and large subunit (LSU) D1/D2 region of rDNA, they were separated into four close-knit clades. Although C. prolifica and O. ryogamiensis formed their own clades, isolates of C. cuboidea separated into two clades, i.e., true C. cuboidea clade and a resembling new species, O. paracuboidea clade. The latter two species are distinguished by the fruiting region of the stroma. In addition, C. alboperitheciata is regarded as a synonym of C. cuboidea. These species should be assigned to the genus Ophiocordyceps.
S2434	J. Moriwaki;T. Tsukiboshi	2009	Colletotrichum echinochloae, a new species on Japanese barnyard millet (Echinochloa utilis)	Mycoscience	50		273-280	10.1007/s10267-009-0485-1			Five isolates of a species of Colletotrichum were collected from Japanese barnyard millet (Echinochloa utilis) in Japan. Although the fungus had once been identi-fied as C. graminicola sensu lato, it was clearly different from C. graminicola isolated from maize (Zea mays) in its falcate and short conidia, 18.0&#8211;22.2 Êm in length, cultural characteristics, and specific pathogenicity to E. utilis. Moreover, molecular phylogenetic analyses using sequences of rDNA-ITS, HMG, and SOD2 indicated a monophyly of the isolates. A new species, Colletotrichum echinochloae, is then proposed based on the morphological, pathological, and molecular characteristics.
S2464	K. Motohashi;S. Inaba;K. Anzai;S. Takamatsu;C. Nakashima	2009	Phylogenetic analyses of Japanese species of Phyllosticta sensu stricto	Mycoscience	50		291-302	10.1007/s10267-009-0487-z			Although the genus concept of Phyllosticta s. str. (teleomorph: Guignardia) as defined by van der Aa is widely accepted, the species concept is still controversial as it is often based on the morphology on host plants. In this study, the culture characteristics within Phyllosticta s. str. were examined and phylogenetic relationships among Japanese species of Phyllosticta s. str. and its teleomorph Guignardia were analyzed using 18S rDNA sequences. Phyllosticta s. str. formed a monophyletic clade. ITS-28S rDNA sequences extracted from fungal cultures derived from various host plants were divided into two sub groups. The first group included cultures from a wide range of host plants and were mainly derived as endophytes from symptomless plant. In the second group, cultures from each host plant genus formed distinct clades. These were often isolated as leaf pathogens from diverse plants. Isolates belonging to the first lineage generally grew faster on oat meal agar. To classify species of Phyllosticta it is necessary to consider an integrated approach such as molecular phylogeny, host plant, colony growth, symptoms and morphological characteristics of the conidiomata.
S2410	M. Ito;S. Takamatsu	2009	Molecular phylogeny and evolution of subsection Magnicellulatae (Erysiphaceae: Podosphaera) with special reference to host plants	Mycoscience	51	1	34-43	10.1007/s10267-009-0005-3			The subsection Magnicellulatae of the genus Podosphaera section Sphaerotheca belongs to the tribe Cystotheceae of the Erysiphaceae, which has the characteristics to produce catenate conidia with distinct fibrosin bodies. In this study, we newly determined the nucleotide sequences of the D1/D2 domains of the 28S rDNA region and the sequences of the rDNA ITS region to investigate the relationships between the phylogeny of this fungal group and their host plants. The results indicated that the 28S rDNA region is too conservative to do a phylogenetic analysis of this fungal group. The phylogenetic analysis using 95 ITS sequences demonstrated that two or more Magnicellulatae taxa often infect the same plant genus or species. Although there is a close relationship between Magnicellulatae and asteraceous hosts, this association seems to be not as strict as that of between Golovinomyces and the Asteraceae. The difference between the two fungal groups may be explained by the different evolutionary timing of them.
S2460	C. P. Kurtzman;M. Suzuki	2010	Phylogenetic analysis of ascomycete yeasts that form coenzyme Q-9 and the proposal of the new genera Babjeviella, Meyerozyma, Millerozyma, Priceomyces, and Scheffersomyces	Mycoscience	51	1	2-14	10.1007/s10267-009-0011-5			Species assigned to the genera Debaryomyces, Lodderomyces, Spathaspora and Yamadazyma, as well as selected species of Pichia and Candida that also form coenzyme Q-9, were phylogenetically analyzed from the combined sequences of the D1/D2 domains of the large subunit and the nearly complete small subunit rRNA genes. Species assigned to Debaryomyces partitioned into three clades and species assigned to Pichia were distributed among six clades. These well supported clades were interpreted as genera, and from this analysis, the following new genera are proposed: Babjeviella, Meyerozyma, Millerozyma, Priceomyces, and Scheffersomyces. The genus Schwanniomyces was reinstated and emended, and the genus Yamadazyma was phylogenetically defined. From this study, 23 new combinations and 3 new ranks are proposed. The preceding genera are members of a single, large clade, and it is proposed to delineate this clade as the new family Debaryomycetaceae.
S2353	M. Tarigan;M. Van Wyk;J. Roux;M. J. Wingfield	2010	Three new Ceratocystis spp. in the Ceratocystis moniliformis complex from wounds on Acacia mangium and A. crassicarpa	Mycoscience	51	1	53-67	10.1007/s10267-009-0003-5			The genus Ceratocystis includes many important tree pathogens and agents of sap stain. These fungi have a global distribution and commonly infect wounds on trees. During a survey of wound-infecting pathogens in the genus Ceratocystis on plantation-grown Acacia mangium trees in Indonesia, several isolates resembling C. moniliformis sensu lato (s.l.) were obtained. The aim of this study was to identify these isolates and to test their pathogenicity to commercially grown Acacia spp. in the country. Use was made of morphology and comparisons of DNA sequence data for the ITS, â-tubulin and Elongation Factor 1-á gene regions to identify the isolates. Three previously undescribed species in the C. moniliformis s.l. species complex were identified and are described here as C. inquinans sp. nov., C. sumatrana sp. nov. and C. microbasis sp. nov. Pathogenicity trials on A. mangium and A. crassicarpa in the greenhouse and in the field indicated that all three the species have the potential to infect A. mangium and A. crassicarpa although they are not considered important pathogens.
S2485	S. Nekoduka;K. Tanaka;Y. Harada;T. Sano	2010	Phylogenetic affinity of Mycochaetophora gentianae, the causal fungus of brown leaf spot on gentian (Gentiana triflora), to Pseudocercosporella-like hyphomycetes in Helotiales	Mycoscience	51	2	123-133	10.1007/s10267-009-0021-3			Mycochaetophora gentianae, the causal agent of brown leaf spot on gentian (Gentiana scabra), is characterized by its hyaline besom-like sporophore, although its conidiogenesis and phylogenetic position have so far remained unknown. We isolated the causal fungus from a new host, G. triflora in Iwate, Japan. Both the G. triflora isolate and the ex-type M. gentianae isolate produced symptoms on G. triflora, but not on G. scabra. Microscopic observations of the diseased leaves indicated that conidiogenesis was blastic from short conidiophores, and schizolytic secession of conidia left unthickened and inconspicuous conidial scars on the conidiogenous cells. Conidia were catenate, in branched acropetalous chains; secondary conidia were blastically produced from the first or second cell at the base of primary conidium. The G. triflora isolate was identified as M. gentianae because of its identity to the ex-type in characteristics of culture, pathogenicity, and conidia. Phylogenetic analyses using 3 rDNA sequences combined (SSU + LSU + 5.8S rDNA) indicated that both isolates clustered with Rhexocercosporidium carotae, and the cluster was placed within Helotiales-Rhytismatales. Additional analyses using internal transcribed spacers (ITS) including 5.8S rDNA sequences revealed that both isolates were monophyletic and that they were closely related to three helotialean Pseudocercosporella-like hyphomycetous genera, Helgardia, Rhexocercosporidium and Rhynchosporium.
S2496	S. Uzuhashi;M. Tojo;M. Kakishima	2010	Phylogeny of the genus Pythium and description of new genera	Mycoscience	51	5	337-365	10.1007/s10267-010-0046-7			Phylogeny of the genus Pythium is analyzed based on sequences of the large subunit ribosomal DNA D1/D2 region and cytochrome oxidase II gene region of many Pythium isolates and comprehensive species of related taxa belonging to the Oomycetes. The phylogenetic trees show that the genus Pythium is greatly divergent group and divided into five well-supported monophyletic clades. Each clade is supported by sporangial morphology such as globose, ovoid, elongated or filamentous shapes. Based on the phylogeny and morphology, the genus Pythium (s. str.) is emended, and four new genus, Ovatisporangium, Globisporangium, Elongisporangium, Pilasporangium, are described segregating from Pythium.
S2366	Y. Ogawa;M. Sugiyama;D. Hirose;K. Kusama-Eguchi;S. Tokumasu	2010	Polyphyly of intraspecific groups of Umbelopsis ramanniana and their genetic and morphological variation	Mycoscience	52	2	91-98	10.1007/s10267-010-0074-3			Taxonomic position of three intraspecific groups of Umbelopsis ramanniana in the genus Umbelopsis was analyzed based on the nucleotide sequences of nLSU rDNA 28S D1 - D2 domain. The examined members of the genus Umbelopsis were resolved into major two clades, Clade I and II. The intraspecific groups of U. ramanniana constituted Clade II with U. westeae, U. swartii, U. autotrophica, U. gibberisopra, U. angularis, and U. fusiformis. In this major clade, the intraspecific groups of U. ramanniana split into three polyphyletic subclades. This fact suggests that Umbelopsis ramanniana @is an assemblage of several species that genetically distinct. Interestingly, in spite of diverse sporangiospore shapes of the member of Clade II, genetic variation among them was small. Their flexible sporangia membranes would make possible to develop various shapes of the sporangiospores.
S677	A. Góes-Neto;C. Loguercio-Leite;R. T. Guerrero	2001	Morphological Cladistic Analysis of Tropical Hymenochaetales (Basidiomycota)	Mycotaxon	79		467-479		http://www.mycotaxon.com/vol/abstracts/79/79.467.html	Basidiome morphology; phylogeny; Hymenochaetaceae	A cladistic analysis of some tropical Hymenochaetales, based on basidiome morphology, was carried out. The ingroup encompasses 11 tropical hymenochaetalean species, including those of the most diverse genus (Phellinus) and also of three other genera: Aurificaria, Hymenochaete and Phylloporia. Three outgroups were selected: Trichaptum byssogenum, Datronia caperata and Auricularia polytricha. Cladistic analysis using parsimony was performed with NONA 2.0, implemented by WINCLADA 0.9.99. Cladograms were produced using heuristics search with random taxon addition sequences, tree-bisection-reconnection branch swapping. A total of 17 characters were used in the cladistic analysis and treated as non-additive. One most parsimonious cladogram was produced with 30 steps in length, CI = 0.70 and RI = 0.78. Ten putative monophyletic groups were identified. Ingroup monophyly and polyphyletism of the genus Phellinus were supported. Basidiospore wall thickness and basidiospore color exhibited high phylogenetic signal.
S841	A. Góes-Neto;C. Loguercio-Leite;R. T. Guerrero	2002	Molecular Phylogeny of Tropical Hymenochaetales (Basidiomycota)	Mycotaxon	84		337-354		http://www.mycotaxon.com/vol/abstracts/84/84-337.html	Hymenochaetaceae; cladistics; ribosomal DNA; D3 divergent domain	The present work encompasses the investigation of phylogenetic relationships of 11 species of tropical Hymenochaetales through cladistic methodology using unweighted and weighted maximum-parsimony, outgroup polarization of characters, and branch-and-bound algorithm for the search of equally most parsimonious trees. The data set comprises the complete sequencing of the D3 divergent domain of the nuclear gene that codes for the 25S large subunit of ribosomal RNA. The parsimony analyses corroborate the ingroup monophyly (Hymenochaetales), the sister group relationship between Hymenochaetales and Trichaptum, and the polyphyletism of Phellinus and the Phellinus rimosus species complex. These findings suggest that incrusted hymenial cystidia (Trichaptum) and hymenial setae (Hymenochaetales) are homologous structures. The presence of many short branches in the phylogeny is presumed to be related to cladogenetic events separated by short periods of time. Thus the large number of current tropical species of Phellinus sensu lato may be of recent origin. 
S942	P. B. Matheny;J. F. Ammirati	2003	Inocybe angustispora, I. taedophila, and Cortinarius aureifolius: an unusual inocyboid Cortinarius	Mycotaxon							Both Inocybe angustispora and I. taedophila are taxonomic synonyms of Cortinarius aureifolius, a species found in sandy soils under Pinus in both eastern and western North America. RPB1 and RPB2 nucleotide sequences of the holotype of I. angustispora support a close phylogenetic relationship between this species and Cortinarius croceus of subgenus Dermocybe, also evident by the shared presence of interhyphal pigment deposits. A taxonomic description, illustrations, and gene phylogenies are presented.
S974	P. B. Matheny;R. Watling	2003	A new and unusual species of Inocybe (Inosperma clade) from tropical Africa	Mycotaxon							A new depauperate species, Inocybe misakaensis, is described from tropical Miombo woodlands of Zambia. Morphologically, this new species is similar in outward appearance to members of subgenus Mallocybe (the Mallocybe clade). Phylogenetically, however, I. misakaensis is positioned with strong bootstrap support between sections Rimosae sensu stricto and Cervicolores based on RPB2 nucleotide sequence data. A taxonomic description, illustrations, phylogenetic position, and evolutionary consequences of I. misakaensis are discussed.
S1253	J. K. Stone;D. S. Gernandt	2005	A reassessment of Hemiphacidium, Rhabdocline, and Sarcotrochila (Hemiphacidiaceae)	Mycotaxon	91		115-126				The presence or absence of an iodine reactive ascus tip has been applied inconsistently in Hemiphacidiaceae. The genera Hemiphacidium (I-) and Sarcotrochila (I+) have been differentiated based on the reaction despite a high degree of morphological and ecological similarity, while in the genus Rhabdocline, the iodine reaction has been used to differentiate species and circumscribe subspecies. Molecular phylogenetic analyses indicate that currently recognized subspecies of R. weirii are non-monophyletic while those of R. pseudotsugae form distinct sister lineages. The polyphyly of R. weirii suggests that the presence or absence of an I+ ascus pore is not a good predictor of species circumscriptions. To de-emphasize the importance of the iodine reaction in classification within Hemiphacidiaceae and to promulgate a classification more consistent with relationships revealed by molecular phylogenetics, we propose that Hemiphacidium be synonymized under Sarcotrochila and that subspecies of Rhabdocline pseudotsugae and R. weirii be raised to species rank. The following new combinations are proposed: Sarcotrochila longispora, S. plana, S. convexa, Rhabdocline oblonga, R. obovata, and R. epiphylla.
S2479	G. Platas;V. Gonzaléz;J. Collado;J. Martín;C. Montes;F. Peláez	2009	Ascription of poorly defined taxa to taxonomic entities using molecular phylogenies: a case study on Nodulisporium sp. producers of nodulisporic acid	Mycotaxon	109		443-460	10.5248/109.443			DNA sequences of ITS1-5.8S-ITS2 region, Ò-tubulin and Ñ-actin genes representing a set of Nodulisporium sp. isolates, that produce the antiparasitic agent Nodulisporic acid, and other related cultures from CIBE culture collection, were obtained to: 1) Confirm the molecular homogeneity of these NA producers. 2) Determine the more closely related taxa to NA producers within genus Hypoxylon; 3) Explore the systematic relationships between these strains and other hypoxyloid sequences from public DNA databases. The results showed that this group of strains is included within a cluster of numerous endophytic, pantropical xylariaceous isolates lacking both defined teleomorph and taxonomic status, together with Hypoxylon species from tropical origin that comprises both H. investiens and H. kanchanapisekii.
S2470	B. S. Weir;P. R. Johnston	2009	Characterisation and neotypification of Gloeosporium kaki Hori as Colletotrichum horii nom. nov	Mycotaxon	111		209-219	10.5248/111.209			A neotype is designated for the persimmon anthracnose pathogen Gloeosporium kaki Hori and the fungus is transfered to Colletotrichum as Colletotrichum horii nom. nov. Molecular and morphological analyses place this species as a distinct group within the Colletotrichum gloeosporioides sensu lato species complex. The fungus is associated with dieback and canker of twigs and young branches of persimmon, as well as spots on unripe fruit. The disease occurs on persimmon in China, Japan, and Korea, and is reported for the first time from New Zealand.
S3x27x98c12c26c10	M. L. Blaxter;P. De Ley;J. R. Garey;L. X. Liu;P. Scheldeman;A. Vierstraete;J. R. Vanfleteren;L. Y. Mackey;M. Dorris;L. M. Frisse;J. T. Vida;W. K. Thomas	1998	A molecular evolutionary framework for the phylum Nematoda	Nature	392	6671	71-75	10.1038/32160			Nematodes are important: parasitic nematodes threaten the health of plants, animals and humans on a global scale; interstitial nematodes pervade sediment and soil ecosystems in overwhelming numbers; and Caenorhabditis elegans is a favourite experimental model system. A lack of clearly homologous characters and the absence of an informative fossil record have prevented us from deriving a consistent evolutionary framework for the phylum. Here we present a phylogenetic analysis, using 53 small subunit ribosomal DNA sequences from a wide range of nematodes. With this analysis, we can compare animal-parasitic, plant-parasitic and free-living taxa using a common measurement. Our results indicate that convergent morphological evolution may be extensive and that present higher-level classification of the Nematoda will need revision. We identify five major clades within the phylum, all of which include parasitic species. We suggest that animal parasitism arose independently at least four times, and plant parasitism three times. We clarify the relationship of C. elegans to major parasitic groups; this will allow more effective exploitation of our genetic and biological knowledge of this model species.
S548	D. S. Hibbett;L. B. Gilbert;M. J. Donoghue	2000	Evolutionary instability of ectomycorrhizal symbioses in basidiomycetes	Nature	407		506-508	10.1038/35035065			Mycorrhizae, the symbiotic associations of plant roots and fungal hyphae, are classic examples of mutualisms. In these ecologically important associations, the fungi derive photosynthetic sugars from their plant hosts, which in turn benefit from fungus-mediated uptake of mineral nutrients. Early views on the evolution of symbioses suggested that all long-term, intimate associations tend to evolve toward mutualism. Following this principle, it has been suggested that mycorrhizal symbioses are the stable derivatives of ancestral antagonistic interactions involving plant parasitic fungi1. Alternatively, mutualisms have been interpreted as inherently unstable reciprocal parasitisms, which can be disrupted by conflicts of interest among the partners2-5. To determine the number of origins of mycorrhizae, and to assess their evolutionary stability, it is necessary to understand the phylogenetic relationships of the taxa involved. Here we present a broad phylogenetic analysis of mycorrhizal and free-living homobasidiomycetes (mushroom-forming fungi). Our results indicate that mycorrhizal symbionts with diverse plant hosts have evolved repeatedly from saprotrophic precursors, but also that there have been multiple reversals to a free-living condition. These findings suggest that mycorrhizae are unstable, evolutionarily dynamic associations.
S543	K. M. Pryer;H. Schneider;A. R. Smith;R. Cranfill;P. G. Wolf;J. S. Hunt;S. D. Sipes	2001	Horsetails and ferns are a monophyletic group and the closest living relatives to seed plants	Nature	409		618-622	10.1038/35054555			Most of the 470-million-year history of plants on land belongs to bryophytes, pteridophytes and gymnosperms, which eventually yielded to the ecological dominance by angiosperms 90 Myr ago. Our knowledge of angiosperm phylogeny, particularly the branching order of the earliest lineages, has recently been increased by the concurrence of multigene sequence analyses. However, reconstructing relationships for all the main lineages of vascular plants that diverged since the Devonian period has remained a challenge. Here we report phylogenetic analyses of combined data—from morphology and from four genes—for 35 representatives from all the main lineages of land plants. We show that there are three monophyletic groups of extant vascular plants: (1) lycophytes, (2) seed plants and (3) a clade including equisetophytes (horsetails), psilotophytes (whisk ferns) and all eusporangiate and leptosporangiate ferns. Our maximum-likelihood analysis shows unambiguously that horsetails and ferns together are the closest relatives to seed plants. This refutes the prevailing view that horsetails and ferns are transitional evolutionary grades between bryophytes and seed plants, and has important implications for our understanding of the development and evolution of plants.
S744	C. Brochier;H. Philippe	2002	Phylogeny: A non-hyperthermophilic ancestor for Bacteria	Nature	417		244	10.1038/417244a			The first phyla that emerge in the tree of life based on ribosomal RNA (rRNA) sequences are hyperthermophilic, which led to the hypothesis that the universal ancestor, and possibly the original living organism, was hyperthermophilic1. Here we reanalyse the bacterial phylogeny based on rRNA using a more reliable approach, and find that hyperthermophilic bacteria (such as Aquificales and Thermotogales) do not emerge first, suggesting that the Bacteria had a non-hyperthermophilic ancestor. It seems that Planctomycetales, a phylum with numerous peculiarities, could be the first emerging bacterial group.
S743	G. E. Budd	2002	A palaeontological solution to the arthropod head problem	Nature	417		271-275	10.1038/417271a			The composition of the arthropod head has been one of the most controversial topics in zoology, with a large number of theories being proposed to account for it over the last century1. Although fossils have been recognized as being of potential importance in resolving the issue2, 3, a lack of consensus over their systematics4, 5 has obscured their contribution. Here, I show that a group of previously problematic Cambrian arthropods from the Burgess Shale and Chengjiang faunas form a clade close to crown-group euarthropods, the group containing myriapods, chelicerates, insects and crustaceans6. They are characterized by modified or even absent endopods, and two pre-oral appendages. Comparison with reconstructions of the crown-group euarthropod ground plan6 and recent investigations into onychophorans7, 8 demonstrates that these two appendages are the first antenna (of extant crustaceans) and a more anterior appendage associated with an ocular segment. The latter appendage has been reduced in all crown-group euarthropods. Its most likely relic is as a component of the labrum9. These fossils thus tie together results from disparate living groups (onychophorans and euarthropods).
S1567	M. Schilthuizen;A. v Til;M. Salverda;T. S. Liew;S. S. James;B. Elahan;J. Vermeulen	2005	Microgeographic snail shell evolution associated with behavioural divergence in their predator	Nature							Genetic divergence in geographically isolated populations is a prerequisite for allopatric speciation, one of the most common modes of speciation1-3. When such divergence involves ecologically equivalent populations existing within a small, environmentally homogeneous area, an important role for non-environmental divergence is often found or inferred1,4. Here we show that microgeographic differentiation may involve unexpected small-scale local adaptation. We studied a species complex of Plectostoma snails on scattered limestone outcrops in a 10◊35 km area of lowland rainforest in Borneo. A striking geographic divergence in shell morphology is associated with both neutral genetic divergence and behavioural differentiation in the snails‚ invertebrate predator. We also offer a model for the evolution of reproductive isolation as a result of this process of shell evolution. Our study suggests that fine-scaled analysis of insular systems may reveal a greater role for environmental adaptation in allopatric divergence.
S2012	C. W. Dunn;A. Hejnol;D. Q. Matus;K. Pang;W. E. Browne;S. A. Smith;E. Seaver;G. W. Rouse;M. Obst;G. D. Edgecombe;M. V. Sørensen;S. H. D. Haddock;A. Schmidt-Rhaesa;A. Okusu;R. M. Kristensen;W. C. Wheeler;M. Q. Martindale;G. Giribet	2008	Broad phylogenomic sampling improves resolution of the Animal Tree of Life	Nature				10.1038/nature06614			Long-held ideas regarding the evolutionary relationships among animals have recently been upended by sometimes controversial hypotheses based largely on insights from molecular data1,2. These new hypotheses include a clade of moulting animals (Ecdysozoa)3 and the close relationship of the lophophorates to molluscs and annelids (Lophotrochozoa)4. Many relationships remain disputed, including those that are required to polarize key features of character evolution, and support for deep nodes is often low. Phylogenomic approaches, which utilize data from many genes, have shown promise for resolving deep animal relationships, but are hindered by a lack of data from many important groups. Here we report a total of 39.9 Mb of Expressed Sequence Tags (ESTs) from 29 animals (Supplementary Table 1) belonging to 21 phyla, including 11 phyla previously lacking genomic or EST data. Analyzed in combination with existing sequences (Figs. 1, 2; Supplementary Fig. 1), our data reinforce several previously identified clades that split deeply in the animal tree (including Protostomia, Ecdysozoa, and Lophotrochozoa), unambiguously resolve multiple long-standing issues for which there was strong conflicting support in earlier studies with less data (such as velvet worms rather than tardigrades as the sister group of arthropods5), and provide molecular support for the monophyly of molluscs, a group long recognized by morphologists, for the first time. In addition, we find strong support for several new hypotheses. These include a clade that unites annelids (including sipunculans and echiurans) with nemerteans, phoronids, and brachiopods, molluscs as sister to that assemblage, and the placement of ctenophores as the earliest diverging extant multicellular animals. A single origin of spiral cleavage (with subsequent losses) is inferred from well-supported nodes. Many relationships between a stable subset of taxa find strong support, and a diminishing number of lineages remain recalcitrant to placement on the tree.
S4x3x98c09c33c56	J. B. Whitfield	1997	Molecular and morphological data suggest a single origin of the polydnaviruses among braconid wasps	Naturwissenschaften	84	11	502-507	10.1007/s001140050434			Phylogenetic analyses of both 16S mtDNA sequence data and morphological characters indicate that the polydnavirus-bearing lineage of braconid wasps is monophyletic. The molecular data are consistent with morphological data under the criteria of both maximum parsimony and maximum likelihood, and when the data sets are combined, the support for monophyly is most robust. Furthermore, use of the secondary structure of the 16S molecule in aligning the DNA sequences leads to increased stability of results. This study presents preliminary evidence that the association between braconids and their viruses extends back in time at least as far as the initial divergence of the microgastroid complex of subfamilies at least 60 mya. Given this probable long association between the wasps and viruses, it is not surprising that together they have evolved a rich variety of interactions with their caterpillar hosts.
S913	P. G. Mullin;T. S. Harris;T. O. Powers	2003	Systematic status of Campydora (Nematoda: Campydorina)	Nematology							The systematic position of Campydora which possesses many unique morphological features, especially in pharyngeal structure and stomatal armature, has long been a matter of uncertainty. Thorne (1939) remarked that the ëposition of the Campydorinae' (containing only Campydora) was questionable. Jairajpuri (1983) reviewed the morphology of C. demonstrans, the sole species of Campydora, and concluded that the species warranted placement as the sole member of a monotypic suborder, Campydorina, in the order Dorylaimida. Other authors, notably Siddiqi (1983), place Campydorina in the order Enoplida. We conducted phylogenetic analyses, using 18s small subunit ribosomal DNA sequences generated from a number of taxa in the subclasses Enoplia and Dorylaimia, to evaluate these competing hypotheses. Although precise taxonomic placement of the genus Campydora, and the identity of its closest living relatives, is in need of further investigation, our analyses, under maximum parsimony, distance, and maximum likelihood criteria, unambiguously indicate that Campydora shares more recent common ancestry with genera such as Alaimus, Pontonema, Tripyla and Ironus (Enoplida) than with any members of Dorylaimida, Mononchida or Triplonchida.
S1154	P. G. Mullin;T. S. Harris;T. O. Powers	2004	Phylogenetic relationships of Nygolaimina and Dorylaimina (Nematoda: Dorylaimida) inferred from small subunit ribosomal DNA sequences	Nematology							Phylogenetic reconstructions based on 18S rDNA sequence data indicate that Dorylaimida, comprising the suborders Nygolaimina and Dorylaimina, is a monophyletic lineage, but that there is a deep division within Nygolaimina, giving rise to the possibility that Nygolaimina is paraphyletic. A well-supported clade comprising members of the traditional orders Mermithida and Mononchida (including Bathyodontina) forms the sister taxon to the Dorylaimida. Inferred relationships within this clade indicate that Mermithida shares more recent common ancestry with Mononchina than does Bathyodontina. Vertebrate parasites within Dorylaimia (Dioctophymida and Trichinellida) are reconstructed in a sister-taxon relationship with the Mononchida/Dorylaimida lineage. The enigmatic order Isolaimida (represented by Isolaimium) appears to be ancestral to all other Dorylaimia sampled. Expanded taxon sampling for phylogenetic analyses of the subclass raises new possibilities for the reconstruction of hypothetical character states in the common ancestor of Dorylaimia.
S905	T. R. Allen;T. Millar;S. M. Berch;M. L. Berbee	2003	Culturing and direct DNA extraction find different fungi from the same ericoid mycorrhizal roots	New Phytologist	60	1	255-272	10.1046/j.1469-8137.2003.00885.x			This study compares DNA and culture-based detection of fungi from 15 ericoid mycorrhizal roots of salal (Gaultheria shallon), from Vancouver Island, BC Canada. From the 15 roots, we PCR amplified fungal DNAs and analyzed 156 clones that included the internal transcribed spacer two (ITS2). From 150 different subsections of the same roots, we cultured fungi and analyzed their ITS2 DNAs by RFLP patterns or sequencing. We mapped the original position of each root section and recorded fungi detected in each. Phylogenetically, most cloned DNAs clustered among Sebacina spp. (Sebacinaceae, Basidiomycota). The ascomycetes that predominated among the cultured fungi, Capronia sp. and Hymenoscyphus ericae, both formed intracellular hyphal coils in resynthesis experiments with salal. We illustrate patterns of fungal diversity at the scale of individual roots and compare cloned and cultured fungi from each root. Indicating a systematic culturing detection bias, Sebacina DNAs predominated in 10 of the 15 roots yet Sebacina spp. never grew from cultures from the same roots or from among the more than 200 ericoid mycorrhizal fungi previously cultured from different roots from the same site.
S1038	P. G. Avis;D. J. McLaughlin;B. C. Dentinger;P. B. Reich	2003	Long-term increase in nitrogen supply alters above- and below-ground ectomycorrhizal communities and increases the dominance of Russula spp. in a temperate oak savanna	New Phytologist	160		239-253				We examined the effects of increased nitrogen (N) supply on the ectomycorrhizal fungal communities of a temperate oak savanna. In a 16 yr N addition experiment in which replicate 1000 m2 plots received 0, 5.4 (moderate fertilization), or 17 g N m-2 yr-1 (high fertilization), ectomycorrhizal sporocarp production was measured in the 14th, 15th and 16th year of fertilization. Ectomycorrhizal fungi colonizing roots were examined by morphotyping-PCR-RFLP and sequence analysis in the 14th and 15th year of fertilization. Total sporocarp richness was reduced by >50% in both fertilization levels in all three years while Russula spp. produced approximately five times more sporocarps with high fertilization. Belowground, treatment-scale species richness and species area curves were lower with high fertilization but richness, diversity indices and evenness at smaller spatial scales were not. Dominant fungi colonizing roots included Cenococcum geophilum, common in all treatments, Cortinarius spp., dominant in unfertilized plots, and Russula spp., dominant with high fertilization. In this temperate deciduous ecosystem, response of EMF to N addition is similar to that of coniferous ecosystems in that increased N supply altered EMF diversity and community composition but is different in that dominance of Russula spp. increases.
S1569	O. Fiz;P. Vargas;J. J. Aldasoro	2006	Role of Climate Changes and Pollinators in Miocene Diversification in Geraniaceae	New Phytologist							 We present a new pylogeny of the family Geraniaceae. Evolution and diversification of fruit morphology and biogeography are here analyzed.  Phylogenetic reconstructions were undertaken using trnL-trnF and rbcL sequence data. The presumed vicariance events were identified and dated and the rates of diversification for the four largest genera of Geraniaceae were also calculated.  Biogeographical analyses suggested South America to be the ancestral home of the order Geraniales. The split of the basal-most branches of Geraniaceae may have occurred during the Oligocene, triggered by a change towards a drier and colder climate. However, their diversification expanded during the Miocene coinciding with the beginning of the major aridifications in their distribution areas. Higher diversification rates in Pelargonium seem to correlate with zygomorphy and highly specialised pollination in southern Africa.  An unknown ancestor of the Geraniaceae crown-clade colonised a number of Mediterranean-like habitats, changing from a specialist requiring long-tongued pollinators to a generalist. During evolution, some large-flowered Geranium species counteracted the visits of inefficient pollinators through the possession of a large androecium, while certain species of Erodium developed new insect-attracting structures or developed increased zygomorphy and thus became more specialised.
S1410	L. Tedersoo;K. Hansen;B. A. Perry;R. Kjøller	2006	Molecular and morphological diversity of pezizalean ectomycorrhiza	New Phytologist	170		581-596	10.1111/j.1469-8137.2006.01678.x			Summary 1. A growing body of molecular research is discovering a high diversity of pezizalean ectomycorrhiza (EcM), yet most remain unidentified at the genus or species level. This study uncovers EcM-forming taxa within the Pezizales. 2. EcM-forming Pezizales were revealed by morphotyping and sequencing of EcM root tips from forests in Estonia and Denmark. The taxa on EcM root tips were identified using phylogenetic analyses of LSU rDNA sequences derived from sporocarps of 301 pezizalen species, and comparisons with ITS rDNA sequences. 3. Thirty-three species are suggested as EcM symbionts, representing all three major clades of Pezizales and the genera: Genea, Geopora, Humaria, Tazzetta, Trichophaea, Wilcoxina, Helvella, Hydnotrya, Tuber, Pachyphloeus, Peziza, Sarcosphaera and two Pezizaceae anamorphs. EcM of Pezizales spp. are easily distinguished by anatomy, particularly thick cell walls and stout hyphae. 4. This study demonstrates that Pezizales spp. constitute a considerable proportion of the mycobionts in EcM fungal communities in mature boreal deciduous and coniferous forests in several soil types. Fruit body sequences and EcM descriptions will facilitate identification of pezizalean EcM in future studies.
S1718	A. W. Wilson;E. A. Hobbie;D. S. Hibbett	2007	The ectomycorrhizal status of Calostoma cinnabarinum determined using isotopic, molecular and morphological methods	New Phytologist							Calostoma cinnabarinum belongs to the suborder Sclerodermatineae (Boletales), an ectomycorrhizal group of basidiomycetes, but the genus Calostoma has been described as saprotrophic. This study combines isotopic, molecular and morphological techniques to determine the ecology of C. cinnabarinum. To determine C. cinnabarinum's mode of nutrition, d13C and d15N measurements were compared among co-occuring Calostoma cinnabarinum, ectomycorrhizal fungi, saprotrophic fungi and EcM host plants. Ectomycorrhizal root tips were extracted from soil cores collected beneath C. cinnabarinum fruit bodies. nrITS sequences were obtained from root tips and screened against C. cinnabarinum nrITS sequence to determine if they matched. Root tips colonized by C. cinnabarinum were also described morphologically. Calostoma cinnabarinum resembled EcM fungi but not saprotrophic fungi isotopically. Ectomycorrhizal root tips have nrITS sequences that match C. cinnabarinum fruiting bodies. Several morphological characters are shared between fruiting bodies and EcM root tips of C. cinnabarinum. Results of isotopic, molecular and morphological analyses indicate that Calostoma cinnabarinum is ectomycorrhizal. Molecular analysis and observations of plant associations suggest Calostoma forms ectomycorrhizae with the Fagales.
S2450	J. Kissling;P. K. Endress;G. Bernasconi	2009	Ancestral and monophyletic presence of diplostigmaty in Sebaea (Gentianaceae) and its potential role as a morphological mixed mating strategy	New Phytologist	184	2	303-310	10.1111/j.1469-8137.2009.03000.x			Diplostigmaty, the presence of a primary (apical) stigma and secondary (mid-stylar) stigmas along the style, is only known from the genus Sebaea (Gentianaceae). Early work indicated that the secondary stigmas provide a mechanism of autogamy suggesting that it may ensure reproductive assurance. Here, we test the monophyly of this unique morphological trait. Using Bayesian methods, we infer a nuclear DNA phylogeny for 96 accessions, including ca. 50% of the species from the genus Sebaea. With this phylogeny, we infer the distribution of ancestral states on critical nodes using parsimony and likelihood methods. The inferred nrDNA phylogeny shows that the genus Sebaea is divided in two statistically well supported clades, A and B, consistent with recent estimates. The most recent ancestor (MRCA) of clade A, except the most basal species (S. pusilla), is resolved as diplostigmatic. No reversal to a single stigma is observed within this clade. We suggest that diplostigmaty is evolutionarily stable through time. We also discuss why this reproductive system is not found elsewhere than in Gentianaceae and the potential advantage of diplostigmaty as a stable mixed mating strategy.
S1256	P. B. Heenan;M. I. Dawson;D. N. Redmond;S. J. Wagstaff	2005	Relationships of the New Zealand mountain ribbonwoods (Hoheria glabrata and H. lyallii: Malvaceae), based on molecular and morphological data	New Zealand Journal of Botany							Cluster and principal coordinates analyses of leaf morphological data support the recognition of Hoheria glabrata and H. lyallii at species rank. H. glabrata is distinguished by long leaves with distinctly cordate bases, sparsely hairy surfaces, shallow marginal indentations, and an acuminate apex. This species occurs in western parts of the South Island and in Taranaki in the North Island. In contrast, the leaves of H. lyallii are shorter, have truncate bases, moderately to densely hairy surfaces, and an acute apex. H. lyallii has a more restricted distribution, mainly occuring in Canterbury and Marlborough with a disjunct population in Nelson. A new combination, H. x allanii, is provided for the interspecific hybrid H. angustifolia x H. lyallii. Phylogenetic analyses of ITS and trnK/matK sequence data provided strong support for the recognition of the genus Hoheria, but supported conflicting species groups. The trnK/matK analysis recovered two main clades. One clade comprised all samples of H. glabrata and most samples of H. lyallii, and the other clade included three samples of H. lyallii and all of the other species of Hoheria (H. angustifolia, H. equitum, H. ovata, H. populnea, and H. sexstylosa). Two analyses of the ITS data were undertaken and these provided little indication of species relationships in Hoheria. However, an ITS analysis that excluded H. glabrata and H. lyallii samples with heteroplasmic nucleotide sites recovered a well-supported clade that included all specimens of H. glabrata and a weakly supported clade that comprised most of the specimens of H. lyallii. The conflicting signal from the trnK/matK and ITS sequences provides evidence of hybridisation between different species of Hoheria. Four samples in the ITS data had heteroplasmic nucleotide positions and in the trnK/matK data three of the H. lyallii specimens had the chloroplast haplotype of another species of Hoheria.
S1349	P. R. Johnston;D. Park	2005	Chlorociboria (Fungi, Helotiales) in New Zealand	New Zealand Journal of Botany	43						Fifteen species of Chlorociboria are reported for New Zealand, including 13 new species and one new subspecies. All occur on decorticated wood and all are associated with blue-green staining of that wood. Some species are consistently associated with soft, rotten wood, while others are consistently associated with fallen wood that remains hard and appears more or less intact. The range of morphological variation accepted in the genus is broader than has previously been described, especially with respect to ascospore size and shape. Two of the species have filiform ascospores that coil on release from the asci. Species are distinguished on the basis of variation in ascospore size and shape, the presence or absence of either smooth-walled or rough-walled tomentum hyphae, and on macroscopic appearance. The validity of the generic and species concepts was tested using rDNA ITS sequences. Of species previously reported for New Zealand, only C. argentinensis is accepted.
S1504	B. Paulus;H. Nilsson;N. Hallenberg	2006	Notes on Hypochnicium (Fungi, Basidiomycota)from New Zealand	New Zealand Journal of Botany							The taxonomic and phylogenetic affiliation of Hypochnicium specimens from New Zealand were studied using morphological and molecular analyses. Phylogenetic analyses based on ITS region of rDNA confirm that species within Hypochnicium form a monophyletic group. The synonymy of Gyrophanopsis with Hypochnicium is therefore validated and the genus Nodotia is re-evaluated as a synonym of Hypochnicium. Sequence analyses of H. zealandicum and a specimen within the Hypochnicium punctulatum complex from New Zealand place both on well-supported clades as sister taxa of H. polonense and H. cremicolor respectively. Although spore dimensions overlap with those of H. polonense, H. zealandicum is currently retained as a separate species on the basis of geographical separation and phylogenetic analysis. New Zealand specimens recorded as H. punctulatum represent a new species, which is described and illustrated as H. aotearoae here.
S944	P. R. Johnston;D. Park;M. A. Dick;S. Ortiz-García;D. S. Gernandt	2003	Identifying pine-inhabiting Lophodermium species using PCR-RFLP	New Zealand Journal of Forestry Science	33		10-24				Three species of Lophodermium are previously reported from pine in New ZealandóL. conigenum, L. pinastri, and the newly reported L. molitoris. All are saprobes with an initial endophytic phase. The North American species L. seditiosum is considered a potential threat to New Zealand's plantation forests. Because these fungi are difficult to distinguish morphologically, a simple molecular method was developed to distinguish the four species. The ITS region is digested using HaeIII and HpaII in a single reaction, resulting in unique RFLP banding patterns for each of the species treated. Two genetically distinct groups were recognised within Lophodermium pinastri, one North American and one European. All the New Zealand isolates of L. pinastri tested were identical to the North American group.
S337	A. G. Rodrigo;R. R. Jackson	1992	Four jumping spider genera of the Cocalodes-group are monophyletic with genera of the Spartaeinae (Araneae: Salticidae)	New Zealand Natural Sciences	19		61-67				Wanless (1984a) erected a new sub-family, the Spartaeinae, to contain all members of the incorrectly named Boethinae except the genera Allococalodes, Cocalodes, Holcolaetis, and Sonoita. These were excluded from the sub-family because they possessed a median tegular apophysis on the male palp, a feature which Wanless believed to be synapomorphy of the group, and one which separated the group from members of the Spartaeinae. Our phylogenetic analysis of the extant members of the Spartaeinae, and the Cocalodes-group indicate that the latter are monophyletic with other genera of the sub-family. An amended definition of the sub-family is provided. KEYWORDS: Spartaeinae - Cocalodes-group - phylogeny - monophyly - quasi-polymorphic coding.
S1280	Y. Ogawa;Y. Kurihara;A. Suda;K. Kusama-Eguchi;K. Watanabe;S. Tokumasu	2005	Taxonomic position of the genus Ramicandelaber, Kickxellales, inferred from 18S rDNA	Nippon Kingakukai Kaiho	46						The taxonomic position of Ramicandelaber, Kickxellales, among other kickxellalean and harpellalean fungi was investigated based on 18S rDNA sequences. Neighbor joining analysis and maximum parsimony analysis showed that Ramicandelaber formed a clade independent from kickxellalean and harpellalean fungi. Ramicandelaber may be another order of Kickxellales and Harpellales.
S2096	M. Endo;S. Hatakeyama;Y. Harada;K. Tanaka	2008	Description of a coelomycete Ciliochorella castaneae newly found in Japan, and notes on the distribution and phylogeny of Ciliochorella	Nippon Kingakukai Kaiho							Ciliochorella castaneae which has been previously reported only from the leaves of Castanea europaea and Tilia sp. in India is described and illustrated as the first record of the species from Japan. It was collected on leaves of angiosperms, such as Fraxinus lanuginosa, Viburnum dilatatum, Cercidiphyllum japonicum, Kalopanax pictus, Fagus crenata and Betula ermanii, as well as on a fern, Pteridium aquilinum. Phylogenetic analyses based on the 28S nrDNA suggested that C. castaneae belongs to Amphisphaeriaceae, Xylariales and is close to an anamorphic group so-called ™gpestalotioid fungi™h such as Seiridium and Monochaetia.
S2x3x96c17c24c13	E. Svoma;J. Greihuber	1989	Systematic embryology of the Scilla siberica alliance (Hyacinthaceae)	Nordic Journal of Botany	8		585-600				Eleven species of the Scilla siberica alliance, a well defined monophyletic group within the genus by tradition Scilla, have been investigated embryologically with special reference to embryo sac and endosperm development. Data are now available for 15 out of 20 known species. In most species embryo sacs develop according to the bisporic Allium-type, only in Scilla rosenii according to the tetrasporic Drusa-type. Endosperm development is either nuclear or helobial (in 10 and 4 species respectively, unknown in 1). The taxonomic significance of these traits is evaluated after character polarisation by out-group comparison. Among the out-group taxa, S. persica may be considered as the sister group of the S. siberica alliance because only these two groups have an Allium-type embryo sac, a synapomorphy derived from the plesiomorphic Polygonum-type. The Drusa-type in S. rosenii is an autapomorphy for that species and evolved from an Allium-type embryo sac. S. rosenii is distinct from its sister species S. koenigii, previously thought to be conspecific. Nuclear endosperm is considered to be plesiomorphic rather than apomorphic within the S. siberica alliance, with respect to its occurrence in the presumed sister group and other outgroup taxa (S. hohenackeri group, S. bifolia alliance), but some doubt remains because of a helobial endosperm occurring in the out-group taxon S. messeniaca. The distribution of other synapomorphies within the S. siberica alliance suggests that a helobial endosperm evolved as a synapomorphy for S. bithynica, S. melaina and S. mischtschenkoana, but as a parallel trait in S. leepii. Species status for S. leepii is supported.
S1x29x96c18c05c45	H. V. Hansen	1990	Phylogenetic studies in the Gerbera-complex (Compositae, tribe Mtisieae, subtribe Mutisiinae)	Nordic Journal of Botany	9		469-495				The phylogeny of the Gerbera-complex (Compositae, tribe Mutisieae. subtribe Mutisiinae) is discussed with the use of cladistics. 14 OTUs are accepted, viz. 1. Trichocline s. str., 2. Lulia, 3. Trichocline spathulata (Amblysperma), 4. Gerbera hieracioides, 5. Chaptalia. 6. Leibnitzia, 7. Uechtritzia, 8. Perdicium. 9. Gerbera sect. Gerbera. 10. Gerbera sect. Parva, 11. Gerbera sect. Lasiopus, 12. Gerbera sect. Piloselloides. 13. Gerbera sect. Pseudoseris. and 14. Gerbera sect. Isanthus. The work is mainly based on SEM-studies. The paper discusses the phylogenetic and taxonomic implications of the presented consensus-tree. It is proposed to rank the Gerbera complex as a single, large genus.
S11x6x95c08c45c56	J. W. Kadereit;K. J. Sytsma	1992	Disassembling Papaver: A restriction site analysis of chloroplast DNA	Nordic Journal of Botany	12		205-217				The results from a chloroplast DNA restriction site analysis of the genera Papaver and Roemeria of subf. Papaveroideae (Papaveraceae) and five outgroup taxa are presented. Papaver is represented by 14 species of eight of the 11 sections recognized, Roemeria by two of its three species. Hunnemannia fumariifolia (subf. Eschscholzioideae), Chelidonium majus (subf. Chelidonioideae), Romneya coulteri, Argemone munita and Stylomecon heterophyllum (all subf. Papaveroideae) were chosen as outgroups. DNAs were digested with 24 restriction enzymes. The major results from this analysis are: 1. Papaver, Roemeria and Stylomecon form a monophyletic group supported by at least 17 restriction site mutations and a 150 to 300 base pair deletion in the inverted repeat of the chloroplast genome. 2. Both Stylomecon and Roemeria are nested within Papaver in its traditional circumscription. 3. Of these, Roemeria is nested within P. sect. Argemonidium and is the sister group to P. pavoninum. 4. Dependent on the mode of character weighting chosen, P. sect. Meconella either is the sister group to P. sect. Argemonidium + Roemeria or of P. sect. Argemonidium + Roemeria + Stylomecon + the remainder of Papaver (Papaver s. str.). 5. Stylomecon is the sister group to Papaver s. str. (excluding sects Meconella and Argemonidium). These results are discussed on the background of other available systematic evidence.
S660	M. H. G. Gustafsson;A. S. R. Pepper;V. A. Albert;M. Källersjö	2001	Molecular phylogeny of the Barnadesioideae (Asteraceae)	Nordic Journal of Botany	21	2	149-160	10.1111/j.1756-1051.2001.tb01352.x			The small but morphologically diverse subfamily Barnadesioideae of the sunflower family, Asteraceae, is of special interest as it constitutes the sister-group to the rest of the family. Therefore it is of critical importance for elucidating the origin and early evolution of Asteraceae. Cladistic analyses of DNA sequence variation in the trnL intron and nuclear ribosomal ITS regions strongly support five major clades in the subfamily: Schlechtendalia, Chuquiraga-Doniophyton, Barnadesia-Huarpea, Dasyphyllum subgenus Dasyphyllum and a clade comprising Dasyphyllum subgenus Archidasyphyllum, Arnaldoa and Fulcaldea. Within Dasyphyllum subgenus Dasyphyllum, D. hystrix has a basal position, and sect. Macrocephala is supported as monophyletic, while sect. Microcephala lacks jackknife support. Within Barnadesia, B. parviflora has a very divergent ITS sequence and a basal position in the genus. The phylogenetic trees make some sense of the great morphological variation within the subfamily, although some clades identified here lack obvious defining morphological characteristics. Optimisation of geographical distributions onto the molecular phylogenies shows that the Barnadesioideae most likely originated in southern South America.
S770	S. Liede;U. Meve	2002	Dissolution of Cynanchum sect. Macbridea (Apocynaceae - Asclepiadoideae)	Nordic Journal of Botany	22	5	579-591	10.1111/j.1756-1051.2002.tb01913.x			As a consequence of the recently established polyphyly of American Cynanchum (Apocynaceae - Asclepiadoideae), the former section Macbridea is analyzed in detail using molecular, karyological and morphological data. Three of the five species, C. angustifolium, C. peninsulare and C. utahense, are transferred to Funastrum: F. angustifolium, F. peninsulare and F. utahense. The remaining two species, C. grisebachii and C. wrightianum are known from the type only and it is suggested to cite them as Cynanchum grisebachii and C. wrightianum until analyzable material becomes available.
S802	M. G. H. Gustafsson;V. Bittrich	2003	Evolution of morphological diversity and resin secretion in flowers of Clusia (Clusiaceae): insights from ITS sequence variation	Nordic Journal of Botany	22		183-203				The taxonomically poorly known, neotropical genus Clusia (Clusiaceae) comprises over 300 species of trees, shrubs and hemiepiphytes. The flowers are morphologically highly diverse and offer either nectar, pollen or resin as a reward for pollinators. Resin production in flowers is a poorly studied phenomenon, known from only five angiosperm genera. Variation in sequences of the nuclear ribosomal ITS region was analysed cladistically in order to trace the evolution of floral resin production in Clusia, and as a first step towards a phylogenetically based reclassification of the genus. The most parsimonious trees show that the genera Havetia, Havetiopsis, Oedematopus and Quapoya are nested inside Clusia. Traditionally, Clusia has been divided into sections based on androecial variation, and most of these groups are supported as monophyletic based on the ITS data. Sections Retinostemon, Havetia and Cochlanthera together form one of very few well-supported suprasectional groups. Subgenus Clusia, a group not previously recognised, comprises roughly half of the species and receives moderate support. Character optimisation experiments suggest that resiniferous flowers have evolved at least three times independently in Clusia, but a character-evolution model with a single origin for floral resin is only slightly less parsimonious. Clades of resiniferous species are morphologically the most diverse, and it is concluded that resin production has been a key innovation triggering floral morphological diversification. Secondary losses of resin and switches to apomixis seem to be correlated with colonisation of habitats and areas where resin-collecting bees are less frequent.
S573	G. H. Sung;J. W. Spatafora;R. Zare;K. T. Hodge;W. Gams	2001	A revision of Verticillium sect. Prostrata II. Phylogenetic analyses of SSU and LSU nuclear rDNA sequences from anamorphs and teleomorphs of the Clavicipitaceae	Nova Hedwigia	71		311-328		http://cordyceps.us/files/sung_et_al_2001.pdf	Anamorph; Cordyceps; host-jumping; parsimony; systematics; teleomorph	Parsimony analyses were conducted on partial nucleotide sequences from the small and large subunits of the nuclear ribosomal DNA from representatives of Verticillium sect. Prostrata and related ascomycetes. The majority of species from V.sect. Prostrata were supported as members of the Clavicipitaceae, but they did not form a monophyletic group within the family. Three to six groups of fungi in V.sect. Prostrata were inferred in these analyses and were designated groups B1-D3 following the convention of Zare et al. (2000). These groups integrated with other anamorph and teleomorph genera including Cordyceps, which was also not supported as being monophyletic. Group B1included the anamorph of C. militaris, V.lecanii, V.psalliotae, V.fusisporum, V.aranearum, and V. antillanum. It was part of a larger clade designated Cordyceps s. stricto, which included entomopathogenic species of Cordyceps and anamorphic species of Beauveria, Engyodontium, Microhilum, and Paecilomyces. Group B2 included V. lamellicola, 'Cephalosporium' lanosoniveum, and 'Acremonium' obclavatum and was the most closely related clade to Cordyceps s. stricto. Group C represented a monophyletic clade of nematophagous species that included V. balanoides, V. campanulatum, and V. sinense. It was part of a weakly supported clade designated the C. ophioglossoides clade, which included fungicolous and entomopathogenic species of Cordyceps and within the Clavicipitaceae.
S1858	M. P. Nelsen;A. Gargas	2008	Phylogenetic distribution and evolution of secondary metabolites in the lichenized fungal genus Lepraria (Lecanorales: Stereocaulaceae)	Nova Hedwigia	86		115-131				Molecular sequence data are used to explore the phylogenetic distribution of secondary metabolites and metabolite classes among species of Lepraria. All substance classes examined were phylogenetically widespread, except for ß-orcinol meta-depsides and anthraquinones, which appeared rare and restricted to a single major clade. Benzyl esters were also found to be rare. Taxa producing each substance class examined were not monophyletic. The ability to regularly produce orcinol para-depsides, ß-orcinol meta-depsides, ß-orcinol depsidones, dibenzofurans, benzyl esters, terpenoids and anthraquinones appears to have been gained more than lost, while the ability to produce ß-orcinol para-depsides and higher aliphatic acids has been lost more than gained. Our results suggest that chemical similarities may not necessarily indicate close phylogenetic relationships. Finally, ancestral state reconstruction at the base of genus Lepraria suggests that its ancestor produced ß-orcinol para-depsides (atranorin) but did not produce orcinol para-depsides, ß-orcinol meta-depsides, benzyl esters or anthraquinones.
S2058	M. P. Nelsen;H. T. Lumbsch;R. Lücking;J. A. Elix	2008	Further evidence for the polyphyly of Lepraria (Lecanorales: Stereocaulaceae)	Nova Hedwigia	87	3-4	361-371	10.1127/0029-5035/2008/0087-0361			It has been suggested that the usnic acid-containing species of Lepraria do not belong to Lepraria s. str. In addition, the two usnic acid-containing Lepraria species, Lepraria usnica Sipman and Lepraria coriensis (Hue) Sipman, were suspected to be conspecific by some authors. We incorporate molecular sequence data from two independent loci to test several hypotheses regarding the conspecificity and phylogenetic position of these two taxa. The two species do not form a monophyletic clade, thereby rejecting conspecificity, but both fall outside Lepraria s. str. The placement of L. usnica in Pilocarpaceae is well supported, while the familial placement of L. coriensis could not be determined; the species clusters with taxa outside Lecanorales s. str. This study further illustrates the polyphyly of the leprose growth form and also suggests that certain leprarioid lichens may represent sterile forms of otherwise well-known genera, such as Sporopodium in the Pilocarpaceae.
S2276	C. Douanla-Meli;E. Langer	2009	Fungi of Cameroon II - Two new Russulales species (Basidiomycota)	Nova Hedwigia	88	3-4	491-502	10.1127/0029-5035/2009/0088-0491			Based on fungal material collected in the Mbalmayo Forest Reserve, Cameroon, two Russulaceae for which the specimens could not be satisfactorily placed to any known species, are described as new to science. Lactarius dewevrei is strikingly characterised by the entire blackish to dark date brown basidiomata and winged basidiospores with broad branched ridges of Plinthogali type, and Russula caeruleoanulata is distinguished by the uniformly pastel yellow color, a blue line at the stem apex as well as the bluing of injured surfaces of the stem. DNA-based phylogenetic placement of the new species was assessed using nucleotide sequences of the partial nuclear large subunit ribosomal DNA (nucLSU rDNA). Molecular analyses supported the placement of R. caeruleoanulata in R. delica-R. brevipes group of Russula subg. Compacta sect. Compactae, but did not afford a clear-cut placement of L. dewevrei, rather closely related to Lactarius subg. Plinthogali and also subg. Lactariopsis, while BLAST analyses showed similarity with subgs. Lactariopsis, Piperites and Russularia.
S730	G. Caetano-Anollés	2002	Tracing the evolution of RNA structure in ribosomes	Nucleic Acids Research	30	11	2575-2587	10.1093/nar/30.11.2575			The elucidation of ribosomal structure has shown that the function of ribosomes is fundamentally confined to dynamic interactions established between the RNA components of the ribosomal ensemble. These findings now enable a detailed analysis of the evolution of ribosomal RNA (rRNA) structure. The origin and diversification of rRNA was studied here using phylogenetic tools directly at the structural level. A rooted universal tree was reconstructed from the combined secondary structures of large (LSU) and small (SSU) subunit rRNA using cladistic methods and considerations in statistical mechanics. The evolution of the complete repertoire of structural ribosomal characters was formally traced lineage-by-lineage in the tree, showing a tendency towards molecular simplification and a homogeneous reduction of ribosomal structural change with time. Character tracing revealed patterns of evolution in inter-subunit bridge contacts and tRNA-binding sites that were consistent with the proposed coupling of tRNA translocation and subunit movement. These patterns support the concerted evolution of tRNA-binding sites in the two subunits and the ancestral nature and common origin of certain structural ribosomal features, such as the peptidyl (P) site, the functional relay of the penultimate stem helix of SSU rRNA, and other structures participating in ribosomal dynamics. Overall results provide a rare insight into the evolution of ribosomal structure.
S11x5x95c19c29c47	P. O. Karis	1989	Systematics of the genus Metalasia (Asteraceae-Gnaphalieae)	Opera Botanica	99		1-50				The genus Metalasia of the Asteraceae-Gnaphalieae is monographed. Metalasia is found in Southern Africa, mainly in the Cape region of South Africa. Only one species, viz. M. densa occurs outside the Cape Province, i.e. in Natal, Transvaal, the Orange Free State and also in Lesotho. Of the 52 species, two are each divided into two subspecies. and one is divided into two forms. 14 new species are descrihed, viz. M. acuta, M. albescens, M. calcicola, M. humilis, M. inversa, M. lueola, M. montana, M. oligocephala, M. plicata, M. serrata, M. serrulata, M. tenuis, M. trivialis, and M. umbelliformis, Metalasia divergens ssp. fusc a is also a new taxon. New combinations are Metalasia densa, M. pulchella, M. pulcllerrima f. pallescens and M. phillipsii ssp. incurva. A number of anatomical features of Metalasiaare discussed, which are also a major source of character states, yielding the basis for a cladistic analvsis of Metalasia, including its closest relatives, viz. Atrichalltha and Calotesta alba. Chromosome numbers from four species of Metalasia are given. A few examples of cladistic biogeography from the western Cape are presented.
S1x28x96c15c54c43	A. A. Anderberg	1991	Taxonomy and phylogeny of the tribe Gnaphalieae (Asteraceae)	Opera Botanica	104		1-194				The tribe Gnaphalieae of the Asteraceae has been treated in a generic revision comprising all its genera and species. A cladistic analysis of the generic relationships is also presented. The synonymy and status of the taxa of each genus is presented and most genera are illustrated. Many well known genera like Gnaphalium and Helichrysum are shown to be polyphyletic and composed of several smaller monophyletic entities. The following new genera are described: Bracteantha, Ewartiothamnus Langebergia, Humeocline, Oxylaena, and Srenophalium. A number of names are again recognized at the generic level: Trichogyne, Euchiton, Gamochaeta, Homognaphalium, Gnaphaliothamnus, Pseudognaphalium, Anaphaloides, Leptotriche, Chrysocephalum, Lawrencella, Rhodanthe, Hyalosperma, Gilberta, Polycalymma, Ozothamnus, Psychrophyton. The two new subtribes Loricariinae and Cassiniinae are described and the subtribes Angianthinae and Relhaniinae are transferred to the Gnaphalieae from the Inuleae. At the species level, 166 new combinations are made. and four new names are presented for taxa with illegitimate names: Aliella bracteata, Cladochaeta velutina Gamochaeta cabrerae, and Pseudognaphalium biolettii.
S2x4x96c16c33c16	A. S. Barfod	1991	A monographic study of the subfamily Phytelephantoideae (Arecaceae)	Opera Botanica	105		1-73				The subfamily Phytelephantoideae forms a separate evolutionary line distinguished within the palm family by a number of unusual features: monopodial flower clusters. strongly dimorphic flowers, four-parted perianth whorls and centrifugal stamen initiation. This study describes a new genus and places the former genus Palandra in synonomy under Phytelephas. Three genera, seven species and five subspecies are recognized: Ammandra dasyneura, Ammandra decasperma,a Aphandra natalia, Phytelephas aequatorialis, Phytelephas macrocarpa, Phytelephas macrocarpa ssp. schottii, Phytelephas macrocarpa ssp. tenui-caulis, Phytelephas seemannii, Phytelephas seemannii ssp. brevipes, Phytelephas tumacana. The monograph contains a broad discussion of the character complexes that are emphasized in the definition of taxa. Aspects of reproductive biology and ecology are treated. A cladistic analysis of the species relationship is presented and the results further interpreted in relation to biogeography.
S2293	T. Dikow	2009	A phylogenetic hypothesis for Asilidae based on a total evidence analysis of morphological and DNA sequence data (Insecta: Diptera: Brachycera: Asiloidea)	Organisms Diversity & Evolution	9	3	165-188	10.1016/j.ode.2009.02.004			A phylogenetic hypothesis of relationships of Asilidae is presented by combining morphological and DNA-sequence data in a total evidence framework. The present hypothesis is based on 77 robber-fly species, 11 Asiloidea outgroup species, 211 morphological characters of the adult fly, and approximately 7300 bp of nuclear DNA from five genes (18S and 28S rDNA; AATS, CAD, and EF-1&#945; protein-encoding DNA). The equally weighted, simultaneous parsimony analysis under dynamic homology in POY resulted in a single most parsimonious cladogram with a cost of 27582 (iterative pass optimization, 27703 under regular direct optimization). Six of the 12 included subfamily taxa are recovered as monophyletic. The Trigonomiminae, which has always been considered to be monophyletic based on morphology, is shown to be non-monophyletic. Two of the three Trigonomiminae genera, Holcocephala Jaennicke, 1867 and Rhipidocephala Hermann, 1926, group unexpectedly as the sister taxon to all other Asilidae. The Laphriinae, which had been previously supported in that position, is the sister group of the remaining Asilidae. Five additional subfamily taxa, i.e., Brachyrhopalinae, Dasypogoninae, Stenopogoninae, Tillobromatinae, and Willistonininae, are also shown to be non-monophyletic. The phylogenetic relationships among the higher-level taxa are partly at odds with findings of a recently published morphological study based on a more extensive taxon sampling. The total evidence hypothesis is considered to be the most informative cladistic hypothesis, but the topologies from the total evidence analysis, the morphology only analysis, and the molecular only analysis are compared and contrasted in order to discuss the signal that morphological and molecular data provide and to analyse whether the molecular data outcompete the fewer morphological characters. A clade composed of Apioceridae plus Mydidae is corroborated as the sister taxon to Asilidae.
S2512	A. Nygren;J. Eklof;F. Pleijel	2010	Cryptic species of Notophyllum (Polychaeta: Phyllodocidae) in Scandinavian waters	Organisms Diversity & Evolution	10	3	193-204	10.1007/s13127-010-0014-2			The phyllodocid polychaete Notophyllum foliosum occurs in two colours morphs in Swedish and Norwegian waters, one bleakish yellow to grey form with black patches that is restricted to deeper waters and often associated to reefs of the deep-water coral Lophelia pertusa, and one usually yellow-orange with black patches and white spots that is usually encountered on more shallow bottoms. We have sampled the two forms sympatrically in Norway, and the shallow form on the Swedish west coast. Phylogenetic and haplotype analyses based on the mitochondrial cytochrome c oxidase subunit I (COI) gene and the nuclear internal transcribed spacer region (ITS1 5.8SrDNA ITS2) unequivocally indicate that the deep and shallow form belong to two distinct species. We apply the name N. foliosum to the shallow form, and N. crypticum, new species, to the deeper form. A lectotype is selected for N. foliosum.
S563	H. T. Lumbsch;I. Schmitt;M. I. Messuti	2001	Utility of nuclear SSU and LSU rDNA data sets to discover the ordinal placement of the Coccotremataceae (Ascomycota)	Organisms Diversity and Evolution	1	2	99-112	10.1078/1439-6092-00008		ascomata; Ascomycota; Coccotremataceae; lichens; LSU rDNA; SSU rDNA	Informal ascomycete classifications have traditionally been based in part on ascomatal morphologies. The problems associated with grouping taxa using ascomatal characters are evidenced in the Coccotremataceae where the ascomata have been interpreted either as apothecia or perithecia. We used SSU rDNA sequences representing all classes of the Pezizomycotina to infer the phylogenetic position of the family. The Coccotremataceae clustered within the Lecanoromycetes. Since the Lecanoromycetes are characterized by the presence of apothecia, these data support the apothecial interpretation, given that the ascomata of the Coccotremataceae are not the result of convergent evolution. To evaluate the ordinal placement of the Coccotremataceae we used sequences of the SSU rRNA and LSU rRNA gene of 12 Lecanoromycetes. The SSU and LSU portions of this second analysis reveal conflicting phylogenies. Therefore we compared the two portions with additional statistical tests: splits decomposition, an analysis of the distribution of homoplasy, and a calculation of the ideal nucleotide substitution rate. In all of these tests the LSU data performed better than the SSU data. The results of the incongruence length difference (ILD) test suggest the data portions could be combined. There is no difference in the tree topology of the combined data set and of the LSU portion only, but the bootstrap values in the combined tree are lower. We argue that the low bootstrap supports in the combined tree are due to the phylogenetic signal in the SSU data set. Therefore we use the LSU and the combined tree to base our classification of the Coccotremataceae. In the LSU and the combined tree the inclusion of the Coccotremataceae in the Pertusariales is supported as is the sister relationship of the Pertusariales and Agyriales. Within the Pertusariales the Coccotremataceae and Pertusariaceae are well-supported sister taxa.
S608	K. B. von Hagen;J. W. Kadereit	2001	The phylogeny of Gentianella (Gentianaceae) and its colonization of the southern hemisphere as revealed by nuclear and chloroplast DNA sequence variation	Organisms, Diversity and Evolution	1	1	61-79	10.1078/1439-6092-00005		Gentianella; flower morphology; biogeography; long-distance dispersal; molecular clock; speciation rate	The generic circumscription and infrageneric phylogeny of Gentianella was analysed based on matK and ITS sequence variation. Our results suggested that Gentianella is polyphyletic and should be limited to species with only one nectary per petal lobe. Gentianella in such a circumscription is most closely related to one part of a highly polyphyletic Swertia. Within uninectariate Gentianella two major groups could be recognized: 1) northern hemispheric species with vascularized fimbriae at the base of the corolla lobes, and 2) northern hemispheric, South American, and Australia/New Zealand species without vascularized fimbriae. When fimbriae are present in this latter group, they are non-vascularized. Whereas ITS data suggested a sister group relationship between the fimbriate and efimbriate group, the matK data suggested paraphyly of the efimbriate group with Eurasian efimbriate species as sister to the remainder of the clade. Based on the phylogeny and using geological and fossil evidence and a molecular clock approach, it is postulated that the efimbriate lineage originated in East Asia near the end of the Tertiary. From East Asia it spread via North America to South America, and from there it reached Australia/New Zealand only once by a single long-distance dispersal event. The place of origin of the fimbriate lineage remained doubtful. The high specific diversity of Gentianella in South America probably resulted mainly from the availability of a very large alpine area open to colonization rather than from particularly high speciation rates in comparison to other taxa.
S776	S. Liede;H. Kunze	2002	Cynanchum and the Cynanchinae (Apocynaceae - Asclepiadoideae): a molecular, anatomical and latex triterpenoid study	Organisms, Diversity and Evolution	2	3	239-269	10.1078/1439-6092-00045		Asclepiadoideae; cpDNA; ITS; latex triterpenoids; molecular phylogeny; stem anatomy	The phylogeny of the genus Cynanchum s. str. is studied using cpDNA spacers and ITS. Morphological, anatomical and latex triterpenoid data are interpreted in light of the molecular results, and discrepancies are discussed. Vegetative characters are better indicators of relationship than floral characters, especially corona characters. The monophyly of all Malagasy species and, nested within the latter, of all stem-succulent taxa is ascertained and the genera Folotsia, Karimbolea, Platykeleba and Sarcostemma are subsumed under Cynanchum. One African species, C. galgalense, is excluded from Cynanchum.
S1120	C. D. Bell;M. J. Donoghue	2003	Phylogeny and biogeography of Morinaceae (Dipsacales) based on nuclear and chloroplast DNA sequences	Organisms, Diversity and Evolution	3		227-237				The Morinaceae (Dipsacales) contains 13 species placed in Acanthocalyx, Cryptothladia, or Morina, and distributed from the mountains of southeaster Europe through the Himalayas to the Qinghai-Tibetan Plateau, mainly in alpine habitats. Sequence data from two chloroplast regions (the trnK intron and the trnL-F region) and the internal transcribed spacer (ITS) region of nuclear ribosomal DNA were used to infer phylogenetic relationships of Morinaceae and related Dipsacales. Both the nuclear and chloroplast datasets, as well as the combined data, provide strong supports for relationships within the Valerina clade, placing Morinaceae as the sister group of a clade containing Valerianaceae and Dipsacaceae plus Triplostegia. The Morinaceae, Acanthocalyx, Cryptothladia, and a clade containing Morina and Cryptothladia, are all supported as monophyletic. However, Morina was found to be paraphyletic in several of our analyses, with Morina longifolia more closely related to Cryptothladia than it is to other Morina species. There is some evidence that Morina longifolia produces cleistogamous flowers, as do Cryptothladia species. Dispersal-vicariance analyses support the view that Valerina radiated initially within Asia, with subsequent movement into Europe in Morinaceae, Dipsacaceae, and Valerianaceae, and into the New World in Valerianaceae. For Morinaceae, as for a number of plant groups, the Brahmaputra river drainage marks a significant biogeographic divide, although this has been spanned within Acanthocalyx and the Morina-Cryptothladia lineages.
S857	E. Einax;K. Voigt	2003	Oligonucleotide primers for the universal amplification of beta-tubulin genes facilitate analyses among the regnum FUNGI	Organisms, Diversity and Evolution	3	3	185-194				Among genes coding for proteins with basic structural functions in all eukaryotes, the highly conserved and functionally essential gene for beta-tubulin is receiving increasing attention in the reconstruction of phylogenies within a broad organismic range. We therefore constructed a set of twelve universally applicable primers that allow reliable amplification of beta-tubulin genes among all major eukaryotic kingdoms including fungi (Eumycota), animals (Metazoa) and green plants (Viridiplantae). For primer design, the amino acid sequences of 35 beta-tubulin genes from Ascomycota, Basidiomycota, Chytridiomycota, Zygomycota, Metazoa, Oophyta and Viridiplantae were aligned and used for the definition of four well-conserved regions. These are suitable priming sites in PCR amplification experiments. Out of these amino acid regions twelve primers were designed, which initiate the amplification of beta-tubulin genes from a wide range of eukaryotic organisms with special emphasis on fungi. In four pair-wise primer applications gene fragments of up to 1,500 bp in size could be isolated, which comprise nearly complete beta-tubulin genes from twelve representative species of the Eumycota. The sequences of 7 beta-tubulin fragments were obtained from Allomyces moniliformis, A. neomoniliformis, Blastocladiella britannica, Chytridium confervae, Mortierella isabellina and Trametes versicolor. Reliable amplification of beta-tubulin over a broad spectrum of organisms provides a strong basis for the establishment of both deep level phylogenies and studies of complex species groups based on beta-tubulin gene trees.
S1547	D. J. Colgan;P. A. Hutchings;M. Braune	2006	A multigene framework for polychaete phylogenetic studies	Organisms, Diversity and Evolution	6	3	220-235	10.1016/j.ode.2005.11.002			Establishing a robust phylogeny of Polychaeta has proven very difficult using either morphological or molecular datasets. There remain many conflicts between morphological analyses and hypotheses based on DNA data, these being principally derived from 18S rRNA sequences. For this paper we have assembled a dataset for polychaete species with information for gene segments other than 18S rRNA, including 38 new sequences from twenty-one species. 18S rRNA data were also added to this compilation if available for the species. In addition to 18S rRNA, five gene segments covering a broad range of polychaete diversity were available. These are the D1 and D9-10 expansion regions of 28S rRNA, histone H3, snU2 RNA and cytochrome c oxidase subunit I. Maximum parsimony, maximum likelihood and Bayesian analyses were conducted. Annelida and Mollusca were reciprocally monophyletic in maximum likelihood analyses but Polychaeta included the cephalopod in maximum parsimony analyses and the patellogastropod in Bayesian analyses. When rooted on the Mollusca, optimal topologies from maximum likelihood analyses showed a recognisable basal group of taxa, including Oweniidae, Chaetopteridae and Amphinomidae. The six studied phyllodocidan families plus Orbiniidae (as the sister group of the scale-worms) formed the next most basal group. All analyses support the inclusion of Echiura, Clitellata and Siboglinidae within polychaetes. Bayesian analyses show Echiura as the sister group of Capitellidae agreeing with previous 18S rRNA results, In contrast, Echiura formed the sister group to Trichobranchidae in maximum likelihood and maximum parsimony analyses. Supra-familial groupings consistently recovered within Polychaeta in the analyses are (i) Terebellida without Ampharetidae; (ii) Scolecida (excepting Orbiniidae); (iii) Eunicidae, Lumbrineridae and Clitellata; and (iv) „Cirratuliformia‰ (including Sternaspidae) plus Sabellidae, Serpulidae and Spionidae.
S1644	C. L. Frasier;V. A. Albert;L. Struwe	2006	Amazonian lowland, white sand areas as ancestral regiosn for South American biodiversity: biogeographic and phylogenetic patterns in Potalia (Angiospermae: Gentianaceae)	Organisms, Diversity and Evolution							Present day white sand areas in South America are thought to be relictual areas of earlier, wide-spread habitats now covered by more recent sediments mainly from the Andean orogeny. These ancient, nutrient-poor areas have been suggested to be possible ancestral regions for neotropical plant diversity. Members of the genus Potalia of the Gentianaceae grow in the New World tropics from Costa Rica in the north to southern Bolivia. Until recently, only one Potalia species was accepted, but a new revision identifies eight others. Three species are endemic to lowland, white sand areas in the Amazon and Orinoco basins and share morphological characteristics with Anthocleista, the African-Malagasy sister group to Potalia. To resolve phylogenetic and biogeographic patterns in Potalia, morphological characters and sequences of the internal transcribed spacer (ITS) and the 5S non-transcribed spacer (5S-NTS) of the ribosomal nuclear DNA were collected and used for phylogenetic reconstruction using Bayesian and parsimony-based methods. Potalia species restricted to ancient, nutrient-poor white sand areas of the Amazon Basin and Guayana Shield were placed basal to other Potalia taxa from finer, lateritic, and younger soils, further suggesting that lowland white sand areas may be ancestral seats of neotropical diversity.
S1447	D. Wolff;S. Liede-Schumann	2006	Evolution of flower morphology, pollen dimorphism, and nectar composition in Arcytophyllum, a distylous genus of Rubiaceae	Organisms, Diversity and Evolution							A phylogenetic study of Arcytophyllum based on ITS was conducted and compared with an earlier study based on cpDNA. The position of the widespread A. thymifolium as sister to all other species was confirmed and several well-supported clades could be retrieved. The Central American A. lavarum is well embedded between exclusively or predominantly South American species. To understand the expression of heterostyly in the genus, we analyzed inter- and intraspecific variation in floral morphology, nectar, pollen-ovule-ratio and seed set of ten species in eleven populations. Stigma and anther levels differed significantly between the morphs in the species/populations investigated except for A. filiforme, in which anther levels differed not significantly between the two morphs. Different expressions of heterostyly in Arcytophyllum seem independent of phylogenetic relationships. Nectar sugar composition was similar between the morphs. Nectar of most species presented a larger proportion of hexoses than of sucrose, only the most derived species, A. macbridei and A. vernicosum, have higher sucrose proportions. There is a significant positive correlation between corolla tube length and the proportion of sucrose. Pollen dimorphism, both with regard to the number (long-styled > short-styled) and to the size (short-styled > long-styled) was observed in all taxa investigated except for A. filiforme. According to the pollen-ovule-ratios the breeding systems range from facultative autogamy to facultative xenogamy. The lowest P/O-ratios were found in A. filiforme the highest in A. rivetii. Hymenoptera, Diptera and Coleoptera were observed as flower visitors. Seed production did not differ significantly between the morphs in eight of the eleven species/populations investigated. There is, however a tendency in all species/populations (except for A. macbridei Peru) that the short-styled morph has a higher percentage of seeds per ovule indicating that the short-styled morphs display higher female reproductive success.
S1682	R. G. Beutel;I. Ribera;O. R. P. Bininda-Emonds	2007	A genus-level supertree of Adephaga (Coleoptera)	Organisms, Diversity and Evolution							A supertree for Adephaga was reconstructed based on 43 independent source trees˜including cladograms based on Hennigian and numerical cladistic analyses of morphological and molecular data˜and on a backbone taxonomy. To overcome problems associated with both the size of the group and the comparative paucity of available information, our analysis was made at the genus level (requiring synonymizing taxa at different levels across the trees) and used safe taxonomic reduction to remove especially poorly known species. The final supertree contained 401 genera, making it the most comprehensive phylogenetic estimate yet published for the group. Gyrinidae comprise the basal sister group, with the interrelationships within the family being well resolved. Haliplidae appear as the sister taxon of Geadephaga + Dytiscoidea. Noteridae are the sister group of the remaining Dytiscoidea. Amphizoidae and Aspidytidae are sister groups, and Hygrobiidae forms a clade with Dytiscidae. Resolution within the species-rich Dytiscidae is generally high, but questions remain that are not sufficiently clarified. Trachypachidae are the sister group of Carabidae (including Rhysodidae), in contrast to a proposed sister group relationship between Trachypachydae and Dytiscoidea. Carabidae are only monophyletic with the inclusion of a non-monophyletic Rhysodidae, but the resolution within this megadiverse group is generally low. The non-monophyly of Rhysodidae is extremely unlikely from a morphological point of view, and this group remains the greatest enigma in adephagan systematics. Despite the insights gained through our study, our findings highlight that a combined and coordinated effort of morphologists and molecular systematists is still required to expand the phylogenetic database to enable a solid and comprehensive reconstruction of adephagan phylogeny.
S723	T. J. Cotton	2001	The phylogeny and systematics of blind Cambrian ptychoparioid trilobites	Palaeontology	44	1	167-207	10.1111/1475-4983.00176		trilobites; Conocoryphidae; Ptychopariina; blindness; Cambrian; phylogeny; systematics	The paraphyletic trilobite suborder Ptychopariina includes a large proportion of Cambrian trilobite diversity and is probably ancestral to most groups of post-Cambrian trilobites. Resolution of the phylogenetic relationships within the group is therefore crucial to a better understanding of the initial radiation of trilobites. The recognition of approaches that can successfully resolve the relationships of ptychoparioid taxa is an important first step towards this aim. Cladistic analysis was used to determine relationships within the Cambrian ptychoparioid trilobite family Conocoryphidae, and to test claims that the family is polyphyletic. Ninety-seven characters were coded for 40 conocoryphid species and nine non-conocoryphids. The results indicate that the family consists of four distantly related clades. Three are recognized here as distinct families, including an extensively revised Conocoryphidae, and the families Holocephalidae and Atopidae. The fourth clade is referred to the subfamily Acontheinae (Corynexochida) as the new Tribe Hartshillini. Analysis of the disparity of these four clades shows that they are significantly less morphologically variable than the original polyphyletic taxon, demonstrating the possible effects of taxonomic error on macroevolutionary studies of morphological disparity.
S4x17x97c17c48c06	P. J. Wagner	1997	Patterns of morphologic diversification among the Rostroconchia	Paleobiology	23	1	115-150	10.1666/0094-8373(1997)023<0115:POMDAT>2.3.CO;2	http://www.jstor.org/stable/2401160		Morphologic diversification among rostroconch molluscs is explored using multiple phylogenies derived from different methods. In addition to strict parsimony, phylogenetic estimates were derived using four different methods that employ stratigraphic data. The resultant phylogenies are generally very similar to one another and to the phylogeny proposed by Pojeta and Runnegar (1976). All estimates (including the Pojeta and Runnegar estimate) imply much lower morphologic separations among post-Ordovician rostroconchs (measured here as the frequency of character state change per branch) than among Cambro-Ordovician rostroconchs. However, the data do not suggest that morphologic evolution became more constrained among rostroconchs as a whole, but instead suggest a reduced characteristic rate of morphologic change in the clade that happened to survive the end-Ordovician extinction. Likelihood ratio tests provide strongest support for the hypothesis that morphologic evolution was more constrained within a derived subclade (corresponding to previous definitions of the Conocardioidea, minus the Eopteriidae) than it was in a broad paraphylum (corresponding to the Ribeirioidea + Eopteriidae). Estimates from each of the phylogenetic methods lead to the same conclusions. Various metrics indicate that the pattern is not due to poor sampling of Cambro-Ordovician species and thus merits a biological explanation. Nonphylogenetic analyses of morphologic disparity suggest a similar history of morphologic evolution, including the apparent difference in characteristic rates of morphologic evolution between paraclade and subclade.
S2028	M. Arzanlou;J. Z. Groenewald;R. A. Fullerton;E. C. A. Abeln;J. Carlier;M. F. Zapater;I. W. Buddenhagen;A. Viljoen;P. W. Crous	2008	Multiple gene genealogies and phenotypic characters differentiate several novel species of Mycosphaerella and related anamorphs on banana	Persoonia	20		19-37				Three species of Mycosphaerella, namely M. fijiensis, M. musicola and M. eumusae are involved in the Sigatoka disease complex of bananas. Besides these three primary pathogens, several additional species of Mycosphaerella or their anamorphs have been described from Musa. However, very little is known about these taxa, and for the majority of these species no culture or DNA is available for study. In the present study, we collected a global set of Mycosphaerella strains from banana, and compared them by means of morphology and a multi-gene nucleotide sequence data set. The phylogeny inferred from the ITS region and the combined data set containing partial gene sequences of the actin gene, the small subunit mitochondrial ribosomal DNA and the histone H3 gene revealed a rich diversity of Mycosphaerella species on Musa. Integration of molecular and morphological data sets confirmed more than 20 species of Mycosphaerella (incl. anamorphs) to occur on banana. This study reconfirmed the previously described presence of Cercospora apii, M. citri and M. thailandica, and also identified Mycosphaerella communis, M. lateralis and Passalora loranthi on this host. Moreover, eight new species identified from Musa are described, namely Dissoconium musae Arzanlou & Crous, Mycosphaerella mozambica Arzanlou & Crous, P. assamensis Arzanlou & Crous, Pseudocercospora indonesiana Arzanlou & Crous, P. longispora Arzanlou & Crous, Stenella musae Arzanlou & Crous, S. musicola Arzanlou & Crous, and S. queenslandica Arzanlou & Crous.
S2075	P. W. Crous;B. A. Summerell;L. Mostert;J. Z. Groenewald	2008	Host specificity and speciation of Mycosphaerella and Teratosphaeria species associated with leaf spots of Proteaceae	Persoonia	20		59-86				Species of Mycosphaerella and Teratosphaeria represent important foliicolous pathogens of Proteaceae. Presently approximately 40 members of these genera (incl. anamorphs) have been recorded from Proteaceae, though the majority are not known from culture, and have never been subjected to DNA sequence analysis. During the course of this study, epitypes were designated for several important species, namely Batcheloromyces leucadendri, B. proteae, Catenulostroma macowanii, Mycosphaerella marksii, Teratosphaeria bellula, T. jonkershoekensis, T. parva, and T. proteae-arboreae. Several species were also newly described, namely Batcheloromyces sedgefieldii, Catenulostroma wingfieldii, Dissoconium proteae, Teratosphaeria persoonii, T. knoxdavesii and T. marasasii. Although accepted as being highly host specific, some species were shown to have wider host ranges, such as M. communis (Eucalyptus, Protea), M. konae (Leucospermum, Eucalyptus), M. marksii (Eucalyptus, Leucadendron), T. associata (Eucalyptus, Protea), and T. parva (Eucalyptus, Protea), which in most cases were found to co-occur with other species of Mycosphaerella or Teratosphaeria on Proteaceae. Furthermore, earlier records of T. jonkershoekensis on Proteaceae in Australia were shown to be representative of two recently described species, T. associata and T. maxii. A phenomenon of underdeveloped, or micro-ascospores was also newly observed in asci of T. maculiformis and T. proteae-arboreae. The exact purpose of asci with two distinct types of ascospores remains to be clarified, as both types were observed to germinate on agar.
S2203	P. W. Crous;A. R. Wood;G. Okada;J. Z. Groenewald	2008	Foliicolous microfungi occurring on Encephalartos	Persoonia	21		135-146				Species of Encephalartos, alternatively known as bread trees or bread palms are native to Africa; the genus encompasses more than 60 species, and represents an important component of the indigenous African flora. Recently, a leaf blight disease was noted on several E. altensteinii palms growing at the foot of Table Mountain in the Kirstenbosch Botanical Gardens of South Africa. Preliminary isolations from dead and dying leaves of E. altensteinii, E. lebomboensis and E. princeps, collected from South Africa, as well as Tokyo Island, Japan, revealed the presence of several novel microfungi on this host. Novelties include Phaeomoniella capensis, Saccharata kirstenboschensis, Sclerostagonospora encephalarti, Teratosphaeria altensteinii, T. encephalarti, and Toxicocladosporium tokyoense. New host records of species previously only known to occur on Proteaceae include Cladophialophora proteae and Catenulostroma microsporum, as well as a hyperparasite, Dactylaria leptosphaeriicola, occurring on ascomata of T. encephalarti.
S2048	U. Damm;P. W. Crous;P. H. Fourie	2008	A fissitunicate ascus mechanism in the Calosphaeriaceae, and novel species of Jattaea and Calosphaeria on Prunus wood	Persoonia	20		39-52				During a survey of Prunus wood from South Africa, isolations were made of three presumably Calosphaerialean fungi that formed hyphomycetous, phialidic anamorphs in culture. In order to reveal the phylogenetic relationship of these fungi, they were characterised on a morphological and molecular (LSU and ITS rDNA) basis. Two isolates that formed a teleomorph in culture are newly described as Calosphaeria africana sp. nov. Although asci of Calosphaeria are characterised by having non-amyloid apical rings, two functional wall layers were observed in asci of C. africana, which has hitherto not been observed in any member of the Calosphaeriaceae. However, Calosphaeriaceae (Calosphaeriales, Sordariomycetes) are not closely related to other bitunicate fungi like Dothideomycetes, Chaetothyriales and bitunicate lichens. Possession of two separating wall layers is considered to be a result of both inherited abilities and convergent evolution under a strong selection pressure of the environmental conditions that favour an extension of the ascus. The other two species represented a separate lineage within Calosphaeriaceae, and formed phialophora-like anamorphs. By obtaining the teleomorph in culture, one of them could be identified as a species of Jattaea, described here as Jattaea prunicola sp. nov., while the second, which only produced the anamorph, is named as Jattaea mookgoponga sp. nov. These findings suggest that some species of Jattaea are true members of the Calosphaeriaceae, though the phylogenetic relation of the type, J. algeriensis, remains unknown. Furthermore, it also represents the first report of Jattaea on Prunus wood, and from South Africa.
S2078	U. Damm;L. Mostert;P. W. Crous;P. H. Fourie	2008	Novel Phaeoacremonium species associated with necrotic wood of Prunus trees	Persoonia	20		87-102				The genus Phaeoacremonium is associated with opportunistic human infections, as well as stunted growth and die-back of various woody hosts, especially grapevines. In this study, Phaeoacremonium species were isolated from necrotic woody tissue of Prunus spp. (plum, peach, nectarine and apricot) from different stone fruit growing areas in South Africa. Morphological and cultural characteristics as well as DNA sequence data (5.8S rDNA, ITS-1, ITS-2, beta-tubulin, actin and 18S rDNA) were used to identify known, and describe novel species. From the total number of wood samples collected (257), 42 Phaeoacremonium isolates were obtained, from which 14 species were identified. Phaeoacremonium scolyti was most frequently isolated, and present on all Prunus species sampled, followed by Togninia minima (anamorph: Pm. aleophilum) and Pm. australiense. Almost all taxa isolated represent new records on Prunus. Furthermore, Pm. australiense, Pm. iranianum, T. fraxinopennsylvanica and Pm. griseorubrum represent new records for South Africa, while Pm. griseorubrum, hitherto only known from humans, is newly reported from a plant host. Five species are newly described, two of which produce a Togninia sexual state. Togninia griseo-olivacea, T. africana and Pm. pallidum are newly described from Prunus armeniaca, while Pm. prunicolum and Pm. fuscum are described from Prunus salicina.
S1996	U. Damm;G. J. M. Verkley;P. W. Crous;P. H. Fourie;A. Haegi;L. Riccioni	2008	Paraconiothyrium species on stone fruit trees and other woody hosts, including P. variabile and P. africanum spp. nov	Persoonia	20		9/17/2012				Coniothyrium-like fungi are common wood and soil inhabitants and hyperparasites on other fungi. They belong to different fungal genera within the Pleosporales. Several isolates were obtained on wood of different Prunus species (plum, peach and nectarine) from South Africa, on Actinidia species from Italy and on Laurus nobilis from Turkey. Morphological and cultural characteristics as well as DNA sequence data (5.8S nrDNA, ITS1, ITS2, partial SSU nrDNA) were used to characterise them. The isolates belonged to three species of the recently established genus Paraconiothyrium. This is the first report of Paraconiothyrium brasiliense on Prunus spp. from South Africa. Two new species are described, namely Paraconiothyrium variabile sp. nov. on Prunus persica and Prunus salicina from South Africa, on Actinidia spp. from Italy and on Laurus nobilis from Turkey. A further species, Paraconiothyrium africanum sp. nov. is described on Prunus persica from South Africa. Although other known species of Paraconiothyrium commonly produce aseptate conidia, those of P. africanum and P. hawaiiense comb. nov. are predominantly two-celled.
S2204	S. Essakhi;L. Mugnai;P. W. Crous;J. Z. Groenewald;G. Surico	2008	Molecular and phenotypic characterisation of novel Phaeoacremonium species isolated from esca diseased grapevines	Persoonia	21		119-134				Petri disease and esca are very destructive grapevine decline diseases that occur in young and old vines in most countries where grapevines (Vitis spp.) are cultivated. Phaeoacremonium species are among the principal hyphomycetes associated with Petri disease and esca symptoms, producing a range of enzymes and phytotoxic metabolites. The present study compared the phylogeny of a global collection of 118 Phaeoacremonium isolates from grapevines, in order to gain a better understanding of their involvement in Petri disease and esca. Phylogenetic analyses of combined DNA sequence data sets of actin and &#946;-tubulin genes revealed the presence of 13 species of Phaeoacremonium associated with Petri disease and esca on grapevine. Phaeoacremonium aleophilum was the most frequently isolated species with an incidence up to 80 % of all isolates investigated. Previously described species, namely Pm. alvesii, Pm. griseorubrum and Pm. rubrigenum are newly reported on grapevine from Turkey, Italy and Croatia, repectively. Phaeoacremonium viticola and Pm. scotyli represent new records for Italy, as well as Pm. mortoniae for Hungary and Croatia. In addition, four new species of Phaeoacremonium, namely Pm. croatiense, Pm. hungaricum, Pm. sicilianum and Pm. tuscanum are newly described from grapevine based on morphology, cultural characteristics, as well as molecular phylogeny.
S2107	M. Groenewald;H. M. Daniel;V. Robert;G. A. Poot;M. T. Smith	2008	Polyphasic re-examination of Debaryomyces hansenii strains and the reinstatements of D. hansenii, D. fabryi and D. subglobosus	Persoonia	21		17-27				The type species of the genus Debaryomyces, D. hansenii, is a highly heterogeneous species. It has been isolated from a large diversity of natural sources, like fruit, air, water, soil, but most frequently from processed food products. The classification of this yeast species urgently needs clarification. The heterogeneity in taxonomic criteria has resulted in the description of varieties linked to D. hansenii. The aim of this study was to re-examine and classify D. hansenii using a polyphasic approach. A total of 65 Debaryomyces hansenii isolates were examined, 57 representing the variety hansenii and nine the variety fabryi. The selection of strains for whole genome comparisons and phylogenetic analysis was based on polymerase chain reaction mediated fingerprints using four mini- and microsatellite specific primers. The discriminating power of growth at 35°C and 37°C was re-examined and ascospore production was observed. Whole genome comparisons and phylogenetic analyses were performed on selected isolates from each of the clusters obtained from the DNA fingerprint analyses. The data indicated the presence of three distinct species within the D. hansenii group, which were represented by type strains of former species and that are proposed to be reinstated: D. hansenii (CBS 767T=MUCL 49680T), D. fabryi (CBS 789T=MUCL 49731T) and D. subglobosus (CBS 792T=MUCL 49732T).
S2234	E. N. G. L;S. Kocsubé;T. Papp;C. Vágvölgyi	2008	Phylogeny and character evolution of the coprinoid mushroom genus Parasola as inferred from LSU and ITS nrDNA sequence data	Persoonia							Phylogenetic relationships, species concepts and morphological evolution of the coprinoid mushroom genus Parasola were studied. A combined data set of nuclear ribosomal ITS and LSU sequences was used to infer phylogenetic relationships of Parasola species and several outgroup taxa. Clades recovered in the phylogenetic analyses corresponded well to morphologically discernable species, although in the case of P. lilatincta, P. leiocephala and P. plicatilis amended concepts proved necessary. Parasola galericuliformis and P. hemerobia are shown to be synonymous with P. leiocephala and P. plicatilis, respectively. By mapping morphological characters on the phylogeny, it is shown that the emergence of deliquescent Parasola taxa was accompanied by the development of pleurocystidia, brachybasidia and a plicate pileus. Spore shape and the position of the germ pore on the spores showed definite evolutionary trends within the group: from ellipsoid the former becomes more voluminous and heart-shaped, the latter evolves from the centre to eccentric in taxa referred to as Œcrown‚ Parasola species. The results are discussed and compared to other Coprinus sensu lato and Psathyrella taxa. Homoplasy and phylogenetic significance of various morphological characters, as well as indels in ITS and LSU sequences, are also evaluated.
S2105	S. M. Marek;K. Hansen;M. Romanish;R. G. Thorn	2008	Molecular systematics of the cotton root rot pathogen, Phymatotrichopsis omnivora	Persoonia							Cotton root rot is an important soilborne disease of cotton and numerous dicot plants in the southwestern United States and Mexico. The causal organism, Phymatotrichopsis omnivora (= Phymatotrichum omnivorum), is known only as an asexual, holoanamorphic (mitosporic) fungus, and produces conidia resembling those of Botrytis. Although the corticoid basidiomycetes Phanerochaete omnivora (Polyporales) and Sistotrema brinkmannii (Cantharellales; both Agaricomycetes) have been suggested as teleomorphs of Phymatotrichopsis omnivora, phylogenetic analyses of nuclear small- and large-subunit ribosomal DNA and subunit 2 of RNA polymerase II from multiple isolates indicate that it is neither a basidiomycete nor closely related to other species of Botrytis (Sclerotiniaceae, Leotiomycetes). Phymatotrichopsis omnivora is a member of the family Rhizinaceae, Pezizales (Ascomycota: Pezizomycetes) allied to Psilopezia and Rhizina.
S2177	S. Marincowitz;J. Z. Groenewald;M. J. Wingfield;P. W. Crous	2008	Species of Botryosphaeriaceae occurring on Proteaceae	Persoonia	21		111-118				The Botryosphaeriaceae includes several species that are serious canker and leaf pathogens of Proteaceae. In the present study, sequence data for the ITS nrDNA region were used in conjunction with morphological observations to resolve the taxonomy of species of Botryosphaeriaceae associated with Proteaceae. Neofusicoccum luteum was confirmed from Buckinghamia and Banksia in Australia, and on Protea cynaroides in South Africa. A major pathogen of Banksia coccinea in Australia was shown to be N. australe, and not N. luteum as previously reported. Neofusicoccum protearum was previously reported on Proteaceae from Australia, Madeira, Portugal and South Africa, and is shown here to also occur in Hawaii and Tenerife (Canary Islands). Furthermore, several previous records of N. ribis on Proteaceae were shown to be N. parvum. Saccharata capensis is described as a new species that is morphologically similar to S. proteae. There is no information currently available regarding its potential importance as plant pathogen and pathogenicity tests should be conducted with it in the future.
S2134	H. D. T. Nguyen;K. A. Seifert	2008	Description and DNA barcoding of three new species of Leohumicola from South Africa and the United States	Persoonia	21		57-69				Three new species of Leohumicola (anamorphic Leotiomycetes) are described using morphological characters and phylogenetic analyses of DNA barcodes. Leohumicola levissima and L. atra were isolated from soils collected after forest fires in Crater Lake National Park (USA). Leohumicola incrustata was isolated from burned fynbos from the Cape of Good Hope Nature Reserve, South Africa. The three species exhibit characteristic Leohumicola morphology but are morphologically distinct based on conidial characters. Two DNA barcode regions, the Internal Transcribed Spacer (ITS) nuclear rDNA region and the cytochrome oxidase subunit I (Cox1) mitochondrial gene, were sequenced. Single gene parsimony, dual-gene parsimony and dual-gene Bayesian inference phylogenetic analyses support L. levissima, L. atra, L. incrustata as distinct phylogenetic species. Both ITS and Cox1 barcodes are effective for the molecular identification of Leohumicola species.
S2129	A. J. L. Phillips;A. Alves;S. Pennycook;P. Johnston;A. Ramaley;A. Akulov;P. W. Crous	2008	Resolving the phylogenetic and taxonomic status of dark-spored teleomorph genera in the Botryosphaeriaceae	Persoonia	21		29-55				Species in the Botryosphaeriaceae are common plant pathogens and saprobes found on a variety of mainly woody hosts. Teleomorphs typically have hyaline, aseptate ascospores. However, some have been reported with brown ascospores and their taxonomic status is uncertain. A multi-gene approach (SSU, ITS, LSU, EF1-alpha and beta-tubulin) was used to resolve the correct phylogenetic position of the dark-spored ŒBotryosphaeria‚ teleomorphs and related asexual species. Neodeightonia and Phaeobotryon are reinstated for species with brown ascospores that are either one-septate (Neodeightonia) or two-septate (Phaeobotryon). Phaeobotryosphaeria is reinstated for species with brown, aseptate ascospores that bear an apiculus at either end. The status of Sphaeropsis is clarified and shown to be the anamorph of Phaeobotryosphaeria. Two new genera, namely Barriopsis for species having brown, aseptate ascospores without apiculi and Spencermartinsia for species having brown, one-septate ascospores with an apiculus at either end are introduced. Species of Dothiorella have brown, one-septate ascospores and differ from Spencermartinsia in the absence of apiculi. These six genera can also be distinguished from one another based on morphological characters of their anamorphs. Although previously placed in the Botryosphaeriaceae, Dothidotthia, was shown to belong in the Pleosporales, and the new family Dothidotthiaceae is introduced to accommodate it.
S2201	F. Roets;L. L. Dreyer;M. J. Wingfield;D. Begerow	2008	Thecaphora capensis sp. nov., an unusual new anther smut on Oxalis in South Africa	Persoonia	21						The smut genus Thecaphora contains plant parasitic microfungi that typically infect very specific plant organs. In this study, we describe a new species of Thecaphora from Oxalis lanata var. rosea (Oxalidaceae) in the Cape Floristic Region of South Africa. Molecular phylogenetic reconstructions based on large subunit ribosomal DNA sequence data confirmed the generic placement of the fungus and confirmed that it represents an undescribed species for which the name T. capensis sp. nov. is provided. The closest known sister species of the new taxon is T. oxalidis that infects the fruits of Oxalis spp. in Europe, Asia and the Americas. In contrast, T. capensis produces teliospores within the anthers of its host. This is the first documented case of an anther-smut from an African species of Oxalis and the first Thecaphora species described from Africa.
S2199	R. A. Samson;J. Houbraken;J. Varga;J. C. Frisvad	2008	Polyphasic taxonomy of the heat resistant ascomycete genus Byssochlamys and its Paecilomyces anamorphs	Persoonia							The genus Paecilomyces is restricted to anamorphs of the ascomycetous genus Byssochlamys. Byssochlamys and related Paecilomyces strains are often heat resistant and may produce mycotoxins in contaminated pasteurized foodstuffs. A comparative study of all Byssochlamys species was carried out using a polyphasic approach to find characters that differentiate species and to establish accurate data on potential mycotoxin production by each species. Phylogenetic analysis of the ITS region and parts of the ∞Ò-tubulin and calmodulin genes, macro- and micromorphological examinations and analysis of extrolite profiles were applied. Phylogenetic analyses revealed that the Byssochlamys genus includes nine species, five of which form a teleomorph, i.e. B. nivea, B. fulva, B. lagunculariae, B. zollerniae and B. spectabilis, while four are strictly asexual, P. saturatus, P. brunneolus, P. formosus and P. divaricatus. Among these, Byssochlamys nivea produces the mycotoxins patulin and byssochlamic acid and the immunosuppressant mycophenolic acid. Byssochlamys lagunculariae produces byssochlamic acid and mycophenolic acid and thus chemically resembles B. nivea. Some strains of P. saturatus produce patulin and brefeldin A, while Byssochlamys spectabilis (anamorph Paecilomyces variotii sensu stricto) produces viriditoxin. Some micro- and macromorphological characters are valuable for identification purposes, including the shape and sizes of conidia and ascospores, presence and ornamentation of chlamydospores, growth rates on MEA and CYA, acid production on CREA and the growth rates on CYA. A dichotomous key is provided for species identification based on phenotypical characters.
S2054	X. D. Zhou;K. Jacobs;T. Kirisits;D. B. Chhetri;M. J. Wingfield	2008	A new Leptographium species associated with the root collar weevil Hylobitelus chenkupdorjii on Pinus wallichiana in Bhutan	Persoonia							Leptographium spp. are commonly associated with bark beetles and weevils (Coleoptera: Curculionidae), and some are important tree pathogens. In a recent survey of diseases and insect pests of conifer trees in Bhutan, the root collar weevil, Hylobitelus chenkupdorjii was found girdling young Himalayan blue pine (Pinus wallichiana) trees in Central Bhutan. Intensive wood staining and a Leptographium sp. were associated with damage by this insect. The fungus was also isolated from individuals of H. chenkupdorjii. It was tentatively identified based on morphology and then compared with other Leptographium spp. using DNA sequences for three gene regions. Morphological characteristics showed that the Leptographium sp. from H. chenkupdorjii is similar to, but distinct from L. procerum and L. profanum. DNA sequence comparisons revealed that the isolates from Bhutan resided in a distinct well-supported clade, and confirmed that they represent an undescribed taxon for which the name Leptographium bhutanense sp. nov. is provided.
S2345	R. Cheewangkoon;P. W. Crous;K. D. Hyde;J. Z. Groenewald;C. To-Anan	2008	Species of Mycosphaerella and related anamorphs on Eucalyptus leaves from Thailand	Persoonia	21		77-91	10.3767/003158508x370857			Eucalyptus is a substrate that supports highly diverse fungal taxa, many of which remain undescribed. Several Mycosphaerella species and related anamorphs also represent potentially serious foliar pathogens of Eucalyptus. The microfungi treated in the present study were isolated from symptomatic Eucalyptus leaves collected in Thailand during June-October 2007. Species were initially identified based on morphological and cultural characteristics. Identifications were confirmed using comparisons of DNA sequence data of the internal transcribed spacers (ITS1, 5.8S nrDNA, ITS2) and the 28S nrDNA (LSU) regions. To help distinguish species of Pseudocercospora, the dataset was expanded by generating partial sequences of the translation elongation factor 1-Î± and actin genes. By integrating the morphological and molecular datasets, five new taxa are distinguished, namely Mycosphaerella pseudomarksii, M. irregularis, M. quasiparkii, Pseudocercospora chiangmaiensis and Penidiella eucalypti. New records for Thailand include M. vietnamensis and M. heimii.
S2361	P. M. Scott;T. I. Burgess;P. A. Barber;B. L. Shearer;M. J. C. Stukely;G. E. S. J. Hardy;T. Jung	2008	Phytophthora multivora sp. nov., a new species recovered from declining Eucalyptus, Banksia, Agonis and other tree species in Western Australia	Persoonia	22		1-13	10.3767/003158509x415450			A new Phytophthora species, isolated from rhizosphere soil of declining or dead trees of Eucalyptus gomphocephala, E. marginata, Agonis flexuosa, and another 13 plant species, and from fine roots of E. marginata and collar lesions of Banksia attenuata in Western Australia, is described as Phytophthora multivora sp. nov. It is homothallic and produces semipapillate sporangia, smooth-walled oogonia containing thick-walled oospores, and paragynous antheridia. Although morphologically similar to P. citricola, phylogenetic analyses of the ITS and coxI gene regions demonstrate that P. multivora is unique. Phytophthora multivora is pathogenic to bark and cambium of E. gomphocephala and E. marginata and is believed to be involved in the decline syndrome of both eucalypt species within the tuart woodland in south-west Western Australia.
S2407	P. W. Crous;U. Braun;M. J. Wingfield;A. R. Wood;H. D. Shin;B. A. Summerell;A. C. Alfenas;C. J. R. Cumagun;J. Z. Groenewald	2009	Phylogeny and taxonomy of obscure genera of microfungi	Persoonia	22		139-161	10.3767/003158509X461701			The recently generated molecular phylogeny for the kingdom Fungi, on which a new classification scheme is based, still suffers from an under representation of numerous apparently asexual genera of microfungi. In an attempt to populate the Fungal Tree of Life, fresh samples of 10 obscure genera of hyphomycetes were collected. These fungi were subsequently established in culture, and subjected to DNA sequence analysis of the ITS and LSU nrRNA genes to resolve species and generic questions related to these obscure genera. Brycekendrickomyces (Herpotrichiellaceae) is introduced as a new genus similar to, but distinct from Haplographium and Lauriomyces. Chalastospora is shown to be a genus in the Pleosporales, with two new species, C. ellipsoidea and C. obclavata, to which Alternaria malorum is added as an additional taxon under its oldest epithet, C. gossypii. Cyphellophora eugeniae is newly described in Cyphellophora (Herpotrichiellaceae), and distinguished from other taxa in the genus. Dictyosporium is placed in the Pleosporales, with one new species, D. streliziae. The genus Edenia, which was recently introduced for a sterile endophytic fungus isolated in Mexico, is shown to be a hyphomycete (Pleosporales) forming a pyronellea-like synanamorph in culture. Thedgonia is shown not to represent an anamorph of Mycosphaerella, but to belong to the Helotiales. Trochophora, however, clustered basal to the Pseudocercospora complex in the Mycosphaerellaceae, as did Verrucisporota. Vonarxia, a rather forgotten genus of hyphomycetes, is shown to belong to the Herpotrichiellaceae and Xenostigmina is confirmed as synanamorph of Mycopappus, and is shown to be allied to Seifertia in the Pleosporales. Dichotomous keys are provided for species in the various genera treated. Furthermore, several families are shown to be polyphyletic within some orders, especially in the Capnodiales, Chaetothyriales and Pleosporales.
S2308	P. W. Crous;J. Z. Groenewald;B. A. Summerell;B. D. Wingfield;M. J. Wingfield	2009	Co-occurring species of Teratosphaeria on Eucalyptus	Persoonia	22		38-48	10.3767/003158509x424333			A common leaf spot disease occurring on Eucalyptus cladocalyx and E. lehmannii in the Western Cape Province of South Africa is known from literature to be caused by the fungus Coniothyrium ovatum, which is a pathogen native to several eucalypts in Australia. Recent collections have shown, however, that Australian material identified as C. ovatum was morphologically and phylogenetically distinct from the South African specimens, and that all these taxa would be better accommodated in the genus Teratosphaeria. South African material previously identified as C. ovatum, were found to represent two species that co-occur in the same leaf spots, described here as T. verrucosa and T. juvenalis. Furthermore, a fresh collection of T. ovata from E. phoenicea in Australia, is distinguished morphologically and phylogenetically from similar, newly described taxa such as T. caesia on E. caesia, and T. veloci on E. miniata. Although these leaf pathogens appear to be of minor economical importance, they are morphologically similar to two serious eucalypt canker pathogens, namely T. zuluensis and T. gauchensis, which predominantly cause stem cankers, but could also be found occurring in leaf spots on their own, or in association with some of the other species treated here. Further research is required, therefore, to devise molecular detection techniques for these taxa in an attempt to rapidly distinguish the minor pathogens from the more serious quarantine pathogens that co-occur on leaf material.
S2346	P. W. Crous;M. J. Wingfield;J. Z. Groenewald	2009	Niche sharing reflects a poorly understood biodiversity phenomenon	Persoonia	22		83-94	10.3767/003158509x439364			Eucalyptus spp. are susceptible to a large number of foliar pathogens, some of which can cause serious defoliation and die-back. In this study, a single leaf spot on a Eucalyptus leaf collected in Madagascar revealed an unusual association of microfungi with disease symptoms. Initial observations indicated that the leaf spot was associated with Mycosphaerella marksii, a common pathogen of eucalypts. However, more intensive scrutiny showed the presence of several other microfungi co-occuring in this, and other leaf spots on the leaf. A total of 41 single conidial propagules were subsequently obtained from a single lesion for morphological study and DNA sequence comparisons. Based on these data, 11 members of the Capnodiales, including one species of Pestalotiopsis (Xylariales), were observed. Of the Capnodialean taxa, nine could be cultivated, which revealed one known species, M. marksii, two taxa in the Cladosporium cladosporioides species complex that were not treated here, and six new species, including Passalora intermedia, Pseudocercospora madagascariensis, Teratosphaeria hortaea, Toxicocladosporium chlamydosporum, T. rubrigenum and T. veloxum. Results of this study highlight a remarkable fungal biodiversity that can occur within a very specific niche. Furthermore, the results emphasise the importance of verifying the identity of fungal isolates in culture, as many taxa, especially those of the Capnodiales, frequently co-occur in the same niche, lesion or leaf spot.
S2360	T. Jung;T. I. Burgess	2009	Re-evaluation of Phytophthora citricola isolates from multiple woody hosts in Europe and North America reveals a new species, Phytophthora plurivora sp. nov	Persoonia	22		95-110	10.3767/003158509x442612			During large-scale surveys for soilborne Phytophthora species in forests and semi-natural stands and nurseries in Europe, homothallic Phytophthora isolates with paragynous antheridia, semipapillate persistent sporangia and a growth optimum around 25 °C which did not form catenulate hyphal swellings were recovered from 37 host species in 14 families. Based on their morphological and physiological characters and the similarity of their ITS DNA sequences with sequences of isolates at GenBank designated as P. citricola, these isolates were routinely identified as P. citricola. In this study DNA sequence data from the internal transcribed spacer regions (ITS1 and ITS2) and 5.8S gene of the rRNA operon, the mitochondrial coxI and &#946;-tubulin genes were used in combination with morphological and physiological characteristics to characterise these isolates and compare them to the ex-type and the authentic type isolates of P. citricola, and two other taxa of the P. citricola complex, P. citricola I and the recently described P. multivora. Due to their unique combination of morphological, physiological and molecular characters these semipapillate homothallic isolates are described here as a new species, P. plurivora sp. nov.
S2377	K. Schubert;A. Greslebin;J. Z. Groenewald;P. W. Crous	2009	New foliicolous species of Cladosporium from South America	Persoonia	22		111-122	10.3767/003158509x449381			Two new species of Cladosporium found on necrotic needles of Pinus ponderosa trees in Patagonia, Argentina, are described as C. chubutense and C. pini-ponderosae. An additional isolate from dead leaves of Cortaderia collected in Colombia, which is a sister taxon to the species occurring on Pinus is described as Cladosporium colombiae. These species are phylogenetically closely related, but differ from each other and other known species by multilocus sequence data, phenetic characters and culture characteristics.
S2311	U. K. Simon;J. Z. Groenewald;P. W. Crous	2009	Cymadothea trifolii, an obligate biotrophic leaf parasite of Trifolium, belongs to Mycosphaerellaceae as shown by nuclear ribosomal DNA analyses	Persoonia	22		49-55	10.3767/003158509x425350			The ascomycete Cymadothea trifolii, a member of the Dothideomycetes, is unique among obligate biotrophic fungi in its capability to only partially degrade the host cell wall and in forming an astonishingly intricate interaction apparatus (IA) in its own hyphae, while the attacked host plant cell is triggered to produce a membranous bubble opposite the IA. However, no sequence data are currently available for this species. Based on molecular phylogenetic results obtained from complete SSU and partial LSU data, we show that the genus Cymadothea belongs to the Mycosphaerellaceae (Capnodiales, Dothideomycetes). This is the first report of sequences obtained for an obligate biotrophic member of Mycosphaerellaceae.
S2375	M. Thines;Y. J. Choi;E. Kemen;S. Ploch;E. B. Holub;H. D. Shin;J. D. G. Jones	2009	A new species of Albugo parasitic to Arabidopsis thaliana reveals new evolutionary patterns in white blister rusts (Albuginaceae)	Persoonia	22		123-128	10.3767/003158509x457931			The obligate biotrophic lineages of the white blister rusts (Albuginales, Oomycota) are of ancient origin compared to the rather recently evolved downy mildews, and sophisticated mechanisms of biotrophy and a high degree of adaptation diversity are to be expected in these organisms. Speciation in the biotrophic Oomycetes is usually thought to be the consequence of host adaptation or geographic isolation. Here we report the presence of two distinct species of /Albugo/ on the model plant /Arabidopsis thaliana/, /Albugo candida/ and /Albugo laibachii/, which is formally introduced in this manuscript. Both species may occupy the same host within the same environment, but are nevertheless phylogenetically highly distinct, as inferred from analyses of both mitochondrial and nuclear DNA-sequences. Different ways of adapting to their host physiology might constitute an important factor of their different niches. Evidence for this can be gained from the completely different host range of the two pathogens. While /Albugo candida/ is a generalist species, consisting of several physiological varieties, which is able to parasitize a great variety of Brassicaceae, /Albugo laibachii/ has not been found on any host other than /Arabidopsis thaliana/. Therefore, /Albugo laibachii/ belongs to a group of highly specialized species, like the other known specialist species in /Albugo /s.str., /Albugo koreana/, /Albugo lepidii/ and /Albugo voglmayrii/. The comparative investigation of the effector genes and host targets in the generalist and the specialist species may constitute a model system for elucidating the fundamental processes involved in plant pathogen co-adaptation and speciation.
S2393	J. H. C. Woudenberg;M. M. Aveskamp;J. de Gruyter;A. G. Spiers;P. W. Crous	2009	Multiple Didymella teleomorphs are linked to the Phoma clematidina morphotype	Persoonia	22		56-62	10.3767/003158509x427808			The fungal pathogen Phoma clematidina is used as a biological agent to control the invasive plant species Clematis vitalba in New Zealand. Research conducted on P. clematidina as a potential biocontrol agent against C. vitalba, led to the discovery of two perithecial-forming strains. To assess the diversity of P. clematidina and to clarify the teleomorph-anamorph relationship, phylogenetic analyses of 18 P. clematidina strains, reference strains representing the Phoma sections in the Didymellaceae, and strains of related species associated with Clematis were conducted. Partial sequences of the ITS1, ITS2 and 5.8S rRNA gene, the ß-tubulin gene and 28S rRNA gene were used to clarify intra- and inter-species relationships. These analyses revealed that P. clematidina resolves into three well-supported clades which appear to be linked to differences in host specificity. Based on these findings, Didymella clematidis is newly described, and the descriptions of P. clematidina and D. vitalbina are amended.
S2392	J. Abdollahzadeh;E. M. Mohammadi Goltapeh;A. R. Javadi;M. Shams-bakhsh;R. Zare;A. J. L. Phillips	2009	Barriopsis iraniana and Phaeobotryon cupressi: two new species of the Botryosphaeriaceae from trees Iran	Persoonia	23		1-8	10.3767/003158509x467552			Species in the Botryosphaeriaceae are well known as pathogens and saprophytes of woody host, but little is known about the species that occur in Iran. In a recent survey of this family in Iran two fungi with diplodia-like anamorphs were isolated from various tree hosts. These two fungi were fully characterised in terms of morphology of the anamorphs in culture, and sequences of the ITS1/ITS2 regions of the ribosomal DNA operon. Phylogenetic analyses placed them within a clade consisting of Barriopsis and Phaeobotryon, but they were clearly distinct from known species in these genera. Therefore they are described here as two new species, namely Barriopsis iranianum on Citrus, Mangifera and Olea and Phaeobotryon cupressi on Cupressus sempervirens.
S2487	R. Cheewangkoon;J. Z. Groenewald;B. A. Summerell;K. D. Hyde;C. To-anun;P. W. Crous	2009	Myrtaceae, a cache of fungal biodiversity	Persoonia	23		55-85	10.3767/003158509x474752			Twenty-six species of microfungi are treated, the majority of which are associated with leaf spots of Corymbia, Eucalyptus and Syzygium spp. (Myrtaceae). The treated species include three new genera, Bagadiella, Foliocryphia and Pseudoramichloridium, 20 new species and one new combination. Novelties on Eucalyptus include: Antennariella placitae, Bagadiella lunata, Cladoriella rubrigena, C. paleospora, Cyphellophora eucalypti, Elsinoë eucalypticola, Foliocryphia eucalypti, Leptoxyphium madagascariense, Neofabraea eucalypti, Polyscytalum algarvense, Quambalaria simpsonii, Selenophoma australiensis, Sphaceloma tectificae, Strelitziana australiensis and Zeloasperisporium eucalyptorum. Stylaspergillus synanamorphs are reported for two species of Parasympodiella, P. eucalypti sp. nov. and P. elongata, while Blastacervulus eucalypti, Minimedusa obcoronata and Sydowia eucalypti are described from culture. Furthermore, Penidiella corymbia and Pseudoramichloridium henryi are newly described on Corymbia, Pseudocercospora palleobrunnea on Syzygium and Rachicladosporium americanum on leaf litter. To facilitate species identification, as well as determine phylogenetic relationships, DNA sequence data were generated from the internal transcribed spacers (ITS1, 5.8S nrDNA, ITS2) and the 28S nrDNA (LSU) regions of all taxa studied.
S2517	P. W. Crous;B. A. Summerell;A. J. Carnegie;M. J. Wingfeld;G. C. Hunter;T. I. Burgess;V. Andjic;P. A. Barber;J. Z. Groenewald	2009	Unravelling Mycosphaerella: do you believe in genera?	Persoonia	23		99-118	10.3767/003158509x479487			Many fungal genera have been defined based on single characters considered to be informative at the generic level. In addition, many unrelated taxa have been aggregated in genera because they shared apparently similar morphological characters arising from adaptation to similar niches and convergent evolution. This problem is aptly illustrated in Mycosphaerella. In its broadest definition, this genus of mainly leaf infecting fungi incorporates more than 30 form genera that share similar phenotypic characters mostly associated with structures produced on plant tissue or in culture. DNA sequence data derived from the LSU gene in the present study distinguish several clades and families in what has hitherto been considered to represent the Mycosphaerellaceae. In some cases, these clades represent recognisable monophyletic lineages linked to well circumscribed anamorphs. This association is complicated, however, by the fact that morphologically similar form genera are scattered throughout the order (Capnodiales), and for some species more than one morph is expressed depending on cultural conditions and media employed for cultivation. The present study shows that Mycosphaerella s.s. should best be limited to taxa with Ramularia anamorphs, with other well defined clades in the Mycosphaerellaceae representing Cercospora, Cercosporella, Dothistroma, Lecanosticta, Phaeophleospora, Polythrincium, Pseudocercospora, Ramulispora, Septoria and Sonderhenia. The genus Teratosphaeria accommodates taxa with Kirramyces anamorphs, while other clades supported in the Teratosphaeriaceae include Baudoinea, Capnobotryella, Devriesia, Penidiella, Phaeothecoidea, Readeriella, Staninwardia and Stenella. The genus Schizothyrium with Zygophiala anamorphs is supported as belonging to the Schizothyriaceae, while Dissoconium and Ramichloridium appear to represent a distinct family. Several clades remain unresolved due to limited sampling. Mycosphaerella, which has hitherto been used as a term of convenience to describe ascomycetes with solitary ascomata, bitunicate asci and 1-septate ascospores, represents numerous genera and several families yet to be defined in future studies.
S2518	P. W. Crous;B. A. Summerell;A. J. Carnegie;M. J. Wingfield;J. Z. Groenewald	2009	Novel species of Mycosphaerellaceae and Teratosphaeriaceae	Persoonia	23		119-146	10.3767/003158509x479531			Recent phylogenetic studies based on multi-gene data have provided compelling evidence that the Mycosphaerellaceae and Teratosphaeriaceae represent numerous genera, many of which can be distinguished based on their anamorph morphology. The present study represents the second contribution in a series describing several novel species in different capnodealean genera defined in a previous study. Novelties on Eucalyptus from Australia include: Penidiella pseudotasmaniensis, P. tenuiramis, Phaeothecoidea intermedia, P. minutispora, Pseudocercospora tereticornis, Readeriella angustia, R. eucalyptigena, R. menaiensis, R. pseudocallista, R. tasmanica, Teratosphaeria alboconidia, T. complicata, T. majorizuluensis, T. miniata, T. profusa, Zasmidium aerohyalinosporum and Z. nabiacense, while Teratosphaeria xenocryptica is described on Eucalyptus from Chile. Novelties on other hosts include Phaeophleospora eugeniicola on Eugenia from Brazil, and Zasmidium nocoxi on twig litter from the USA.
S2568	L. Lombard;C. A. Rodas;P. W. Crous;B. D. Wingfield;M. J. Wingfield	2009	Calonectria (Cylindrocladium) species associated with dying Pinus cuttings	Persoonia	23		41-47	10.3767/003158509x471052			Calonectria (Ca.) species and their Cylindrocladium (Cy.) anamorphs are well-known pathogens of forest nursery plants in subtropical and tropical areas of the world. An investigation of the mortality of rooted Pinus cuttings in a commercial forest nursery in Colombia led to the isolation of two Cylindrocladium anamorphs of Calonectria species. The aim of this study was to identify these species using DNA sequence data and morphological comparisons. Two species were identified, namely one undescribed species, and Cy. gracile, which is allocated to Calonectria as Ca. brassicae. The new species, Calonectria brachiatica sp. nov., resides in the Ca. brassicae species complex. Pathogenicity tests with Ca. brachiatica and Ca. brassicae showed that both are able to cause disease on Pinus maximinoi and P. tecunumanii. An emended key is provided to distinguish between Calonectria species with clavate vesicles and 1-septate macroconidia.
S2446	T. Shirouzu;D. Hirose;S. Tokumasu	2009	Taxonomic study of the Japanese Dacrymycetes	Persoonia	23		16-34	10.3767/003158509x468443			The class Dacrymycetes is a rather small group of brown-rot wood-decaying jelly fungi characterised by forked basidia and an orange to yellow gelatinous to cartilaginous fruit body. In Japan, dacrymycetous fungi had not been investigated for a long time, justifying a taxonomic re-examination. In the present study we attempted an investigation of the dacrymycetous fungal flora of Japan, and recognised 28 taxonomic entities, including five new taxa, i.e. Dacrymyces ancyleus, D. aureosporus, D. pinacea, D. subarcticus and Dacryopinax sphenocarpa, and nine new records. Due to the present survey, the total number of dacrymycetous species recorded from Japan increased from 29 to 43. Of the newly described species, Dacrymyces ancyleus is characterised by recurved, cylindrical basidiocarps and hyphae with clamp connections. Dacrymyces aureosporus resembles D. chrysospermus, but differs in wall thickness of its marginal hyphae. Dacrymyces pinacea and D. subarcticus represent new coelomycetous anamorphic species. Dacryopinax sphenocarpa has sharp, spathulate basidiocarps, and hyphae with clamp connections. Descriptions, illustrations and photographs of fruit bodies are presented with some taxonomic notes. Molecular phylogenetic analyses were conducted to verify the species identification, and the remaining problems in Dacrymycetes taxonomy are discussed based on these data.
S2523	A. Yurkov;A. M. Schäfer;D. Begerow	2009	Barnettozyma vustinii A. Yurkov, A.M. Schäfer, et D. Begerow, sp. nov	Persoonia	23		189	10.3767/003158509X482951			During the project aimed to study yeasts in soils under different land use regimes, multiple cultures resembling morphological properties of Williopsis californica were isolated by plating soil suspension on the solid acidified glucose-yeast extract-peptone agar (GPYA) medium. Detailed physiological and phylogenetic analyses showed that the strains belong to the genus Barnettozyma of the Saccharomycetales (Ascomycota, Saccharomycotina), but did not correspond to any of the hitherto recognised species.
S553	B. L. Cohen;A. Gawthrop;T. Cavalier-Smith	1998	Molecular phylogeny of brachiopods and phoronids based on nuclear-encoded small subunit ribosomal RNA gene sequences	Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B	353	1378	2039-2061	10.1098/rstb.1998.0351		brachiopod; phoronid; SSU rDNA; molecular phylogeny; lophophorate; lophotrochozoa	Brachiopod and phoronid phylogeny is inferred from SSU rDNA sequences of 28 articulate and nine inarticulate brachiopods, three phoronids, two ectoprocts and various outgroups, using gene trees reconstructed by weighted parsimony, distance and maximum likelihood methods. Of these sequences, 33 from brachiopods, two from phoronids and one each from an ectoproct and a priapulan are newly determined. The brachiopod sequences belong to 31 different genera and thus survey about 10% of extant genus-level diversity. Sequences determined in di∞erent laboratories and those from closely related taxa agree well, but evidence is presented suggesting that one published phoronid sequence (GenBank accession U12648) is a brachiopod-phoronid chimaera, and this sequence is excluded from the analyses. The chiton, Acanthopleura, is identi¢ed as the phenetically proximal outgroup; other selected outgroups were chosen to allow comparison with recent, non-molecular analyses of brachiopod phylogeny. The different outgroups and methods of phylogenetic reconstruction lead to similar results, with di∞erences mainly in the resolution of weakly supported ancient and recent nodes, including the divergence of inarticulate brachiopod sub-phyla, the position of the rhynchonellids in relation to long- and short-looped articulate brachiopod clades and the relationships of some articulate brachiopod genera and species. Attention is drawn to the problem presented by nodes that are strongly supported by non-molecular evidence but receive only low bootstrap resampling support. Overall, the gene trees agree with morphology-based brachiopod taxonomy, but novel relationships are tentatively suggested for thecideidine and megathyrid brachiopods. Articulate brachiopods are found to be monophyletic in all reconstructions, but monophyly of inarticulate brachiopods and the possible inclusion of phoronids in the inarticulate brachiopod clade are less strongly established. Phoronids are clearly excluded from a sister-group relationship with articulate brachiopods, this proposed relationship being due to the rejected, chimaeric sequence (GenBank U12648). Lineage relative rate tests show no heterogeneity of evolutionary rate among articulate brachiopod sequences, but indicate that inarticulate brachiopod plus phoronid sequences evolve somewhat more slowly. Both brachiopods and phoronids evolve slowly by comparison with other invertebrates. A number of palaeontologically dated times of earliest appearance are used to make upper and lower estimates of the global rate of brachiopod SSU rDNA evolution, and these estimates are used to infer the likely divergence times of other nodes in the gene tree. There is reasonable agreement between most inferred molecular and palaeontological ages. The estimated rates of SSU rDNA sequence evolution suggest that the last common ancestor of brachiopods, chitons and other protostome invertebrates (Lophotrochozoa and Ecdysozoa) lived deep in Precambrian time. Results of this ¢rst DNA-based, taxonomically representative analysis of brachiopod phylogeny are in broad agreement with current morphology-based classi¢cation and systematics and are largely consistent with the hypothesis that brachiopod shell ontogeny and morphology are a good guide to phylogeny.
S928	R. T. Pennington;M. Lavin;D. E. Prado;C. A Pendry;S. Pell;C. A. Butterworth	2003	Neotropical seasonally dry forest plants show patterns of both Tertiary and Quaternary diversification	Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B							Historical climate changes have had a major effect on the distribution and evolution of plant species in the Neotropics. What is more controversial is whether relatively recent Pleistocene climatic changes have driven speciation, or whether Neotropical species diversity is more ancient. This question is addressed using evolutionary rates analysis of nuclear ribosomal ITS sequence data on diverse taxa occupying Neotropical seasonally dry forests, including Ruprechtia (Polygonaceae), robinioid legumes (Fabaceae), Chaetocalyx and Nissolia (Fabaceae), and Loxopterygium (Anacardiaceae). Species diversifications in these taxa occurred both during and before the Pleistocene in Central America, but were primarily pre-Pleistocene in South America. This indicates plausibility both for models that predict tropical species diversity to be recent and that invoke a role for Pleistocene climatic change, and those that consider it ancient and implicate geological factors such as the Andean orogeny and the closure of the Panama Isthmus. Cladistic vicariance analysis was attempted to identify common factors underlying evolution in these groups. In spite of the similar mid-Miocene to Pliocene ages of the study taxa, and their high degree of endemicity in the different fragments of South American dry forests, the analysis yielded equivocal, non-robust patterns of area relationships.
S663	S. R. Santos;D. J. Taylor;R. A. Kinzie Iii;K. Sakai;M. A. Coffroth	2002	Evolution of length variation and heteroplasmy in the chloroplast  rDNA of symbiotic dinoflagellates (Symbiodinum, Dinophyta) and a novel insertion in the universal core region of the large subunit rDNA	Phycologia	41	4	311-318		http://www.auburn.edu/~santosr/pdf/Santosetal2002Phycologia.pdf		Marine dinollagellatcs are a diverse and ecologically important group of unicellular protists responsible for events such as ‘red tides' and for forming mutualislic symbioses with various invertebrates. However, little is known about the evolution of organellar DNA in these organisms. We analyzed domain V of the chloroplast large subunit ribosomal DNA (cp23S-rDNA) from a variety of symbiotic dinoflagellates and uncovered several unique features. These included length heteroplasmy of cp23S-rDNA that resulted from deletion mutations and the presence of a 1-13 bp nucleotide insertion in the universal core region. The insertion in the large subunit rDNA is novel across all kingdoms and appears to be a unique derived state for the symbiotic genus Symbiodinium. In addition, analysis of expansion segments (ES) revealed that the cp23S-rDNA domain V of symbiotic dinoflagellates is the most size variable of any known plastid-harbouring organism. Our results demonstrate that the universal core secondary structure and the chloroplast rDNA ES are less constrained in size than previously thought.
S1455	S. R. Lee;I. K. Lee;Y. Suh	2005	Molecular evidence for recognizing Antithamnion sparsum (Ceramiales, Rhodophyta) at the species level	Phycologia	44		530-535				The nucleotide sequences of rbcS and Rubisco spacer in the chloroplast genome, and the ITS 1 and the small subunit rDNA in the nuclear genome were determined to clarify the taxonomic relationships of Antithamnion sparsum with its close allies. The species has been often considered to be conspecific with A. densum, but this taxonomic placement still remains to be confirmed. Phylogenetic analyses based on multiple molecular markers clearly distinguished A. sparsum from A. densum. In addition, the Atlantic A. densum from Kerry, Ireland, was clearly separated from the North Pacific A. defectum from San Juan Island, Washington. Comparative analyses of four DNA regions showed that the rbcS region provided the most useful information with the highest resolution and statistical support among the four DNA regions studied. Molecular evidence strongly suggests that A. sparsum should be treated as an independent species.
S2109	S. Sato;W. H. C. F. Kooistra;T. Watanabe;S. Matsumoto;L. K. Medlin	2008	A new araphid diatom genus Psammoneis gen. nov. (Plagiogrammaceae, Bacillariophyta) with three species based on SSU and LSU rDNA and morphology	Phycologia							Five strains of a hitherto undescribed diatom genus Psammoneis were established from Japanese and Senegalese marine benthic samples. Strains were analysed using nuclear-encoded sequence markers and morphometric parameters of their silica frustules. Valves of all strains show a sternum with striae perpendicular thereupon, typical for pennate diatoms. They possess apical pore fields and lack a raphe, typical for araphids, but also rimoportulae and areola occlusions. Sequence comparison of both the SSU rDNA and the D1/D2 region of the LSU rDNA revealed that the strains group into three markedly distinct genotypes. The strains from different genotypes are also distinguishable by a principal component analysis using four morphometric variables measured on the external valve surface. They are described as three new species in a new genus Psammoneis as P. japonica, P. pseudojaponica and P. senegalensis. Molecular phylogenies support placement of the genus Psammoneis as a member of the Plagiogrammaceae. However, this placement renders the family morphologically more heterogeneous, especially with regards to the areola structure. Therefore, we provide an emended description of the family.
S2110	S. Sato;D. G. Mann;S. Matsumoto;L. K. Medlin	2008	Pseudostriatella (Bacillariophyta): a description of a new araphid diatom genus based on observations of frustule and auxospore structure and 18S rDNA phylogeny	Phycologia	47		371-391				Pseudostriatella oceanica gen et. sp. nov. is a marine benthic diatom that resembles Striatella unipunctata in gross morphology, attachment to the substratum by a mucilaginous stalk, and possession of septate girdle bands. In LM, P. oceanica can be distinguished from S. unipunctata by plastid shape, absence of truncation of the corners of the frustule, indiscernible striation, and absence of polar rimoportulae. With SEM, P. oceanica can be distinguished by a prominent but unthickened longitudinal hyaline area, pegged areolae, multiple marginal rimoportulae, and perforated septum. The hyaline area differs from the sterna of most pennate diatoms in being porous towards its expanded ends; in this respect, it resembles the elongate annuli of some centric diatoms, e.g. Attheya and Odontella. 18S rDNA phylogeny places P. oceanica among the pennate diatoms and supports a close relationship between P. oceanica and S. unipunctata, but the genetic distance between them, coupled with the morphological differences, justifies separation at genus level. However, the affinity of the P. oceanica ˆ S. unipunctata clade remains unresolved both in molecular and morphological study. Both genera are only distantly related to Hyalosira and Grammatophora, despite similarities in frustule structure and growth habit, arguing against their inclusion in the same family. The auxospore is covered with series of transverse and longitudinal bands but the structure and arrangement of these bands appear to be more similar to the properizonia of some centric diatoms than to the classic type of perizonium seen in other pennate diatoms; a few scales are also present. The differences between properizonia and perizonia are discussed.
S2503	M. Hayama;T. Nakada;T. Hamaji;H. Nozaki	2010	Morphology, molecular phylogeny and taxonomy of Gonium maiaprilis sp. nov. (Goniaceae, Chlorophyta) from Japan	Phycologia	49	3	221-234	10.2216/PH09-56.1			The morphology, molecular phylogeny and taxonomy of Gonium maiaprilis Hayama et al. sp. nov. (Goniaceae, Chlorophyta) were studied using clonal cultured material originating from Fukuoka Prefecture, Japan. This species is similar to G. pectorale O. F. M&#252;ller and G. viridistellatum M. Watanabe in having one to three stable pyrenoids in the chloroplasts of 8- or 16-celled vegetative colonies. However, it is distinguished from G. pectorale and G. viridistellatum by the cell arrangement of the 8-celled colonies and from G. pectorale by aplanozygote morphology. Sexual reproduction of G. maiaprilis is heterothallic and isogamous, and the germinating zygote gives rise to a four-cell germ colony. Phylogenetic analyses based on the plastid large subunit of Rubisco genes and sequences for the internal transcribed spacer (ITS) regions of nuclear ribosomal DNA (rDNA) (ITS-1, 5.8S rDNA and ITS-2) suggest that G. maiaprilis is separate from other species of Gonium.
S662	M. L. Berbee	2001	The phylogeny of plant and animal pathogens in the Ascomycota	Physiological and Molecular Plant Pathology	59	4	165-187	10.1006/pmpp.2001.0355		Ascomycota; phylogeny; ascomycete evolution; human pathogenic fungi; plant pathogenic fungi; horizontal transfer; toxin evolution; co-evolution	What makes a fungus pathogenic? In this review, phylogenetic inference is used to speculate on the evolution of plant and animal pathogens in the fungal Phylum Ascomycota. A phylogeny is presented using 297 18S ribosomal DNA sequences from GenBank and it is shown that most known plant pathogens are concentrated in four classes in the Ascomycota. Animal pathogens are also concentrated, but in two ascomycete classes that contain few, if any, plant pathogens. Rather than appearing as a constant character of a class, the ability to cause disease in plants and animals was gained and lost repeatedly. The genes that code for some traits involved in pathogenicity or virulence have been cloned and characterized, and so the evolutionary relationships of a few of the genes for enzymes and toxins known to play roles in diseases were explored. In general, these genes are too narrowly distributed and too recent in origin to explain the broad patterns of origin of pathogens. Co-evolution could potentially be part of an explanation for phylogenetic patterns of pathogenesis. Robust phylogenies not only of the fungi, but also of host plants and animals are becoming available, allowing for critical analysis of the nature of co-evolutionary warfare. Host animals, particularly human hosts have had little obvious effect on fungal evolution and most cases of fungal disease in humans appear to represent an evolutionary dead end for the fungus. Plants have been important in the evolution of fungi, and the rapid nature of co-evolutionary change might partially explain the lack of obvious, global characters uniting all plant pathogens.
S1548	F. Cardinale;L. Ferraris;D. Valentino;G. Tamietti	2007	Induction of systemic resistance by a hypovirulent Rhizoctonia solani isolate in tomato	Physiological and Molecular Plant Pathology							A polynucleate Rhizoctonia isolate (R3) was analyzed for virulence, growth characteristics, enzyme production and presence of dsRNAs. Taxonomic position was assessed morphologically and by AG testing and ITS sequence analysis. Results indicated that R3 is a hypovirulent R. solani AG 4. Mechanisms underlying biocontrol towards virulent R. solani and Botrytis cinerea were investigated and plant-mediated resistance was followed using biochemical markers of defence (PR1, laminarinase, chitinase). Control apparently relies on spatial and nutrient competition in soil, and on systemic induced resistance. This is the first report on induction of systemic resistance and of defence markers by a hypovirulent strain of R. solani.
S618	L. Levy;L. A. Castlebury;L. M. Carris;R. J. Meyer;G. Pimentel	2001	Internal Transcribed Spacer Sequence-Based Phylogeny and Polymerase Chain Reaction-Restriction Fragment Length Polymorphism Differentiation of Tilletia walkeri and T. indica	Phytopathology	91	10	935-940	10.1094/PHYTO.2001.91.10.935			A polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism assay to distinguish Tilleita walkeri, a rye grass bunt fungus that occurs in the southeastern United States and Oregon, from T. indica, the Karnal bunt fungus, is described. The internal transcribed spacer (ITS) region of the ribosomal DNA repeat unit was amplified and sequenced for isolates of T. indica, T. walkeri, T. horrida, and a number of other taxa in the genus Tilletia. A unique restriction digest site in the ITS1 region of T. walkeri was identified that distinguishes it from the other taxa in the genus. Phylogenetic analysis of the taxa based on ITS sequence data revealed a close relationship between T. indica and T. walkeri, but more distant relationships between these two species and other morphologically similar taxa.
S879	G. Cai;L. R. Gale;R. W. Schneider;H. C. Kistler;R. M. Davis;K. S. Elias;E. M. Miyao	2003	Origin of race 3 of Fusarium oxysporum f. sp. lycopersici at a single site in California	Phytopathology	93						Thirty-nine isolates of Fusarium oxysporum were collected from tomato plants displaying wilt symptoms in a field in California two years after F. oxysporum f. sp. lycopersici (FOL) race 3 was first observed at that location. These and other isolates of FOL were characterized for pathogenicity, race and vegetative compatibility group (VCG). Of the 39 California isolates, 22 were in VCG 0030, 11 in VCG 0031 and six in a newly described VCG 0035. Among isolates of VCG 0030, 13 were race 3 and nine were race 2. Of the isolates in VCG 0031 seven were race 2, one was race 1, and three were non-pathogenic to tomato. All six members of VCG 0035 were race 2. Restriction fragment length polymorphisms (RFLPs) and sequencing of the intergenic spacer (IGS) region of rDNA identified five IGS/RFLP haplotypes among 60 isolates of F. oxysporum from tomato that coincided with VCGs. Based on RFLP haplotypes of genomic DNA, five race 3 isolates from California shared the same haplotype with a race 2 isolate from the same location, and all 13 race 3 isolates clustered together into a subgroup in the neighbor joining tree. Collective evidence suggests that race 3 in California originated from the local race 2 population.
S1067	Y. Anikster;L. J. Szabo;T. Eilam;J. Manisterski;S. T. Koike;W. R. Bushnell	2004	Morphology, Life Cycle Biology, and DNA Sequence Analysis of Rust Fungi on Garlic and Chives from California	Phytopathology	94		569-577				In the late 1990's, commercial garlic fields in California (CA) were devastated by an outbreak of rust caused by Puccinia allii. We compared collections of the pathogen from garlic (Allium sativum) and chive (A. schoenoprasum) in central CA and Oregon (OR) to collections from garlic, leek (A. porrum and A. ampeloprasum) in the Middle East. Teliospores from the CA and OR collections were smaller in length, width and cross sectional area compared to collections from the Middle East. CA and OR collections had a shortened life cycle, in which pycnia or aecia were not formed. Germinating teliospores produced a two-celled promycelium, resulting in two basidiospores, each initially with two nuclei indicating that this rust was homothalic. In addition, the morphology of the substomatal vesicles was different between the CA/OR (fusiform) and the Middle Eastern (bulbous) collections. DNA sequence analysis of the nuclear ITS region separated the CA and OR rust collections in a well supported distinct cluster separate from the Middle Eastern and European samples. These results suggest that the rust on garlic and chive in California and Oregon is a different species than the rust fungus on garlic and leek in the Middle East.
S1086	J. Zhang;S. A. Hogenhout;L. R. Nault;C. W. Hoy;S. A. Miller	2004	Molecular and symptom analyses of phytoplasma strains from lettuce reveal a diverse population	Phytopathology	94						Epidemics of aster yellows in lettuce in Ohio, USA are caused by at least seven distinct phytoplasma strains in aster yellows group. Five of the strains are newly reported: AY-BW, AY-WB, AY-BD3, AY-SS and AY-SG. All seven strains were characterized based on symptoms in aster and lettuce, and by polymerase chain reaction (PCR). Strain AY-BD2 (formerly 'Bolt') causes yellowing and leaf distortion in lettuce and bolting in aster, while strain AY-S (formaly 'Severe') causes stunting, leaf clustering and phyllody. Strain AY-WB causes yellowing and wilting in lettuce and witches'-broom in aster. Strain AY-SG induces horizontal growth in lettuce and aster plants. Strain AY-BW causes chlorosis of emerging leaves and abnormally upright growth of leaf petioles. AY-SS causes symptoms similar to those caused by AY-S but has a different PCR-RFLP banding pattern. Strains AY-BD2 and AY-BD3 cause mild leaf and stem distortion in lettuce but are differentiated by PCR-RFLP. All phytoplasma strains collected from lettuce in Ohio belong to the 16SrI group. AY-WB belongs to the 16SrI-A subgroup and the other six belong to the 16SrI-B subgroup. Five of the seven strains were distinguished from each other by primer typing. The results of phylogenetic analyses of sequences of the 16S rRNA genes were basically consistent with the classification based on PCR-RFLP, in which AY-WB clustered with phytoplasmas of the 16rI-A subgroup and the other Ohio lettuce strains clustered with phytoplasmas in the 16SrI-B subgroup.
S1336	C. D. Garzón;D. M. Geiser;G. W. Moorman	2005	Amplified Fragment Length Polymorphism Analysis and Internal Transcribed Spacer and coxII Sequences Reveal a Species Boundary Within Pythium irregulare	Phytopathology	95						Pythium irregulare is a plant-pathogenic oomycete that causes significant damage to a variety of crops, including ornamentals and vegetables. Morphological as well as molecular studies have reported great genetic diversity within P. irregulare which has raised the question as to whether it is a single species or is actually a complex of morphologically similar (cryptic) species. In this study we used AFLP fingerprinting and DNA sequence analysis of the internal transcribed spacers region of the ribosomal genes (ITS region) and the cytochrome oxidase I and II gene cluster (cox I-II) to characterize 68 P. irregulare isolates from the U.S.. The ITS sequence of a P. irregulare Buisman neotype at the CBS collection (CBSnr 733.94; AY598702) as well as DNA sequences of P. irregulare, P. spinosum and P. sylvaticum from previous studies were included in our analysis. Cluster analysis identified a nineteen-isolate group (IR-II) that separated itself from the rest of the sample (IR-I). Population structure and sequence analyses supported the distinction of IR-I and IR-II and identified IR-II as P. irregulare sensu stricto. IR-I was designated P. irregulare complex (P. i. complex). Two insertion/deletion mutations and nine nucleotide substitutions in the ITS region and three in the cox I and II gene cluster separated the two species. Additionally, they significantly (P>0.01) differed in the frequency of 77% of the alleles analyzed. Gene flow results suggested that P. irregulare sensu stricto and P. i. complex are cryptic species capable of exchanging favorable alleles (Nm=0.72).
S1285	M. Groenewald;J. Z. Groenewald;P. W. Crous	2005	Distinct species exist within the Cercospora apii morphotype	Phytopathology							The genus Cercospora is one of the largest genera of hyphomycetes. Cercospora apii sensu lato is the oldest name for a large complex of morphologically indistinguishable Cercospora species occurring on a wide host range. There are currently 659 recognized Cercospora species, and names of another 281 morphologically identical species are included in the synonymy of C. apii sensu lato. Two of the species that belong to the C. apii complex, namely C. apii and C. beticola, cause Cercospora leaf spot on Apium graveolens (celery) and Beta vulgaris (sugarbeet), respectively. In the present study, multi-locus sequence data, Amplified Fragment Length Polymorphism (AFLP) analysis and cultural characteristics were used as additional features to characterize morphologically similar Cercospora strains occurring on celery and sugarbeet. From the data obtained, it is shown that C. apii and C. beticola, although morphologically similar and able to cross-infect each others‚ hosts, are distinct functional species that should be retained as separate entities. Furthermore, a third, as yet undescribed species of Cercospora was detected in celery fields in Korea and Venezuela, suggesting that additional undescribed species may also be found to cause Cercospora leaf spot on celery. A PCR-based diagnostic protocol distinguishes all three Cercospora species.
S1294	M. Hyakumachi;A. Priyatmojo;M. Kubota;H. Fukui	2005	New Anastomosis Groups, AG-T and AG-U, of Binucleate Rhizoctonia spp. Causing Root and Stem Rot of Cut-Flower and Miniature Roses	Phytopathology	95						Root and stem rot of cut-flower roses (Rosa spp.) was observed in commercial glasshouse-grown roses in 10 prefectures of Japan from 1998 through 2001. Binucleate-like Rhizoctonia were mainly isolated from the disease plants. In total, 670 isolates were divided into two types based on cultural appearance; 168 isolates of light brown to brown type and 502 isolates of whitish type. Hyphal anastomosis reaction using representative isolates from each type revealed that light brown to brown type belonged to anastomosis group G (AG-G), while whitish type (here after called AG-CUT) failed to anastomose with tester strains of binucleate Rhizoctonia AG-A through AG-S. Neither isolates of AG-G nor AG-CUT anastomosed with tester strains of a previously reported unknown AG of binucleate Rhizoctonia collected from miniature roses (AG-MIN). In pathogenicity tests, randomly selected isolates of the 3 groups caused root and stem rot on cut-flower and miniature roses. To differentiate AG-CUT and AG-MIN from known AGs of binucleate Rhizoctonia, RFLP and sequence analyses of rDNA-ITS region were conducted. Among the 8 restriction enzymes used, HaeIII produced DNA banding patterns for AG-CUT that differed from those of tester strains and AG-MIN. Additionally, restriction profiles of AG-MIN differed from those of all tester strains. AG-G isolates from cut-flower roses had the same RFLP pattern as the tester strains of AG-G. Based on the results of hyphal anastomosis and RFLP and sequence analysis of rDNA-ITS region, we propose AG-CUT be designated AG-T and AG-MIN be designated AG-U, two new AG of binucleate Rhizoctonia. The phylogenetic tree based on the sequence data of rDNA-ITS region showed that isolates of AG-MIN were in a distinct clade from other AGs while isolates of AG-CUT were in the same clade as those of AG-A. More detailed phylogenetic analysis besides rDNA-ITS region might be necessary for AG classification of binucleate Rhizoctonia.
S1385	P. E. Rolshausen;N. E. Mahoney;R. J. Molyneux;W. D. Gubler	2005	A re-assessment of the species concept in Eutypa lata, the causal agent of Eutypa dieback of grapevine	Phytopathology							Eutypa dieback is a vascular disease of several cultivated crops and trees worldwide. The attribution of the name to the agent responsible for branch dieback is ambiguous. Pathogenicity of Eutypa was first reported on apricot and the causal agent was named E. armeniacae. However, no morphological differences were reported with the previously described E. lata, and some authors considered both species synonymous. Others regarded them as distinct species on the basis of pathogenesis and molecular analysis. We further investigated the relatedness of both species by phylogenetic analyses of the ITS region and _-tubulin gene. These analyses included several other taxa placed in the same family (Diatrypaceae), and yielded 3 groups. The isolates referred to as E. lata in previous work clustered with Diatrype stigma in one group. Isolates of E. armeniacae and E. lata clustered in a second group, supporting the synonymy of these species. The third group included other Eutypa species supporting the polyphyletic origin of this genus. Measurements of conidia length and secondary metabolite production of isolates supported the phylogenetic analyses. Secondary metabolites appeared to be a synapomorphic character shared by several taxa including E. lata, E. armeniacae, E. laevata and E. petrakii.
S1662	J. H. Bowers;F. N. Martin;P. W. Tooley;E. D. M. N. Luz	2006	Genetic and morphological diversity of temperate and tropical isolates of Phytophthora capsici	Phytopathology							Phytophthora capsici is a diverse species causing disease on a broad range of both temperate and tropical plants. In this study, we used cultural characteristics, amplified fragment length polymorphism (AFLP) and DNA sequence analyses of the ribosomal internal transcribed spacer region (ITS) and mitochondrial cytochrome oxidase II (cox II) genes to characterize temperate and tropical isolates from a wide range of host species. All but one temperate isolate grew at 35°C, while all tropical isolates did not. All but two tropical isolates formed chlamydospores, while temperate isolates did not. There was strong bootstrap support for separation of temperate and tropical isolates using AFLP analysis. The majority of temperate isolates clustered within a single clade regardless of host or geographical origin, while the tropical isolates grouped into three distinct clades. Phylogenetic analysis of the ITS regions resulted in a similar separation of temperate and tropical isolates as the AFLP results with 1.0 to 1.6% sequence divergence between the groups. Analysis including other species revealed similar branch lengths separating temperate and tropical isolates as were observed in comparisons among other phylogenetically closely related species in the genus. Analysis of cox II sequence data was less clear. Although the temperate and tropical isolates grouped together apart from other species, there was no bootstrap support for separating these isolates. The level of sequence divergence between these groups was similar to comparisons among P. infestans, P. mirabilis, and P. phaseoli (0.6 to 0.9%). RFLP analysis of the ITS regions separated the temperate and tropical isolates as in the AFLP and ITS phylogenetic analyses, however, RFLP analysis of the cox I and II gene cluster did not distinguish between temperate and tropical isolates. The differences in grouping of isolates in these two RFLP studies should be helpful in identifying isolate subgroups. Our data is equivocal and does not fully clarify whether or not temperate and tropical isolates should be separated into different species.
S1396	Y. Park;X. Chen;Z. K. Punja	2006	Molecular and biological characterization of a mitovirus in Chalara elegans (Thielaviopsis basicola)	Phytopathology							A 2.8 kb double-stranded (ds) RNA element in strain BK18 of Chalara elegans originally isolated from cotton soil in California was characterized by obtaining a full-length cDNA sequence (2,896 nucleotides in length) from a series of overlapping clones. Sequence analysis revealed the presence of one large open reading frame (ORF I) using the mitochondrial genetic code, with 20-34% amino acid identity to the ORF I of other previously reported fungal mitochondrial RNA viruses. The ORF I encoded a putative protein of 705 amino acids and contained the conserved motif characteristic of RNA-dependent RNA polymerases (RdRp). Purification of mitochondria from strain BK18 confirmed the co-localization of this dsRNA, and Northern blot hybridization with a strand-specific probe revealed the (+) single-stranded nature. This Chalara elegans mitovirus (CeMV) is designated as a new member of the Mitovirus genus of the Narnaviridae family. Using ds-RNA specific primers, the ORF I region (positions 427 to 2,544) was obtained from an additional 2.8 kb dsRNA element in strain HA2 originating from carrot roots in the Netherlands. Both ORF¡œs had 98% homology at the nucleotide and amino acid levels. CeMV was also found to be present in five additional strains of C. elegans from different geographic locations worldwide, and a 97-100% nucleotide sequence identity was observed within a 300 bp region of ORF I in these strains. To determine the biological effects of CeMV on C. elegans, attempts to cure strain BK18 of the dsRNA were made. Sequential transfers of mycelium at 35-37≥aC yielded a colony which lacked the 2.8 kb dsRNA when visualized on agarose gels and also in Northern blot hybridization analysis. However, RT-PCR with specific primer sets revealed a band, indicating that dsRNA replication had been significantly repressed (latent). The wild-type and latently-infected strains were compared for colony morphology, growth rate, melanin production, various enzymatic assays (polyphenoloxidase, laccase, tyrosinase and esterase) and virulence on carrot roots. Colony morphology on V8 agar was comparable between the two strains, while growth rate, melanin production and virulence were enhanced in the latently-infected strain. There were no detectable differences in enzymatic activity. Transmission electron microscopy of hyphae of the wild-type and latently infected strains revealed differences in the number and size of the mitochondria, which were enhanced in the latently infected strain. Our results show that CeMV is a new member of the Mitovirus group with some disruptive effects on its fungal host and is present in C. elegans strains from different locations worldwide.
S1494	J. E. Stewart;M. S. Kim;R. L. James;R. K. Dumerose;N. B. Klopfenstein	2006	Molecular characterizion of highly pathogenic F. oxysporum from a conifer nursery	Phytopathology							Fusarium oxysporum can cause severe root disease and damping-off in conifer nurseries. Inoculum is commonly found in most container and bare-root nurseries on healthy and diseased seedlings, in nursery soils, and on conifer seeds. Isolates of F. oxysporum can differ in virulence; however, virulence and colony morphology are not correlated. Forty-one isolates of F. oxysporum collected from nursery samples (soils, healthy seedlings, and diseased seedlings) were characterized by amplified fragment length polymorphism (AFLP) and DNA sequencing of nuclear rDNA (internal transcribed spacer including 5.8S rDNA), mitochondrial rDNA (small subunit: mtSSU), and nuclear translation elongation factor 1á. Each isolate had a unique AFLP phenotype. Out of 121 loci, 111 (92%) were polymorphic; 30 alleles were unique to only highly virulent isolates and 33 alleles were unique to only non-pathogenic isolates. Maximum parsimony and Bayesian analyses of DNA sequences from all three regions and the combined dataset showed that all highly virulent isolates separated into a common clade, with 100% bootstrap and posterior probability support. The AFLP cladograms had similar topologies when compared to the DNA-based phylograms. Several AFLP genetic markers and mtSSU sequences offer potential for development of molecular markers that could be used to detect highly virulent isolates of F. oxysporum in forest nurseries.
S1482	B. Wang;C. L. Brubaker;W. Tate;M. Woods;B. A. Matheson;J. J. Burdon	2006	AFLP analyses and gene genealogies support local origin of two VCGs of Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. vasinfectum in Australia	Phytopathology							Genetic diversity of Fusarium oxysporum f. sp. vasinfectum (Fov) and non-pathogenic F. oxysporum from an area believed to be the center of origin of two VCGs of Fov in Australia was determined using AFLPs. Three lineages (designated as Lineages A, B, and E) were identified among the 294 isolates, of which 99 were pathogenic on cotton (Gossypium hirsutum), i.e., could be designated Fov (81 from diseased cotton plants and 18 from field soil); 195 isolates were non-pathogenic (160 from field soil and 35 from uncultivated soil). All pathogenic isolates, regardless of origin, belonged to Lineage A. They represented eight haplotypes that fell into two subgroups. One subgroup contained isolates known to belong to VCG 01111, while the other subgroup contained VCG 01112 isolates. The 13 non-pathogenic Lineage A isolates represented 11 haplotypes (11 from field soil and two from uncultivated soil). Sequencing of the EF-1∞Ñ and mtSSU genes confirmed that the non-pathogenic Lineage A isolates were more closely related to the Fov isolates than they were to the Lineages B and E isolates. Lineages B and E contained 26 and 50 haplotypes, respectively. The diversity of the Lineage B isolates was greatest in the uncultivated soil, while the diversity of the Lineage E isolates was greatest in the cultivated soils. This is the first report of a F. oxysporum pathogen with a close phylogenetic relationship to co-occurring non-pathogenic F. oxysporum in both cultivated and uncultivated soils.
S1789	M. I. Groenwald;R. E. Barnes;A. V. Bradshaw;A. Dale;A. Brown;J. Z. Groenewald;K. J. Lewis;B. D. Wingfield;M. J. Wingfield;P. W. Crous	2007	Characterization and Distribution of Mating Type Genes in the Dothistroma Needle Blight Pathogens	Phytopathology							Dothistroma septosporum and D. pini are the two main causal agents of Dothistroma needle blight of Pinus spp. in natural forests and plantations. Degenerate primers were used to amplify the partial mating type genes (MAT1-1-1 and MAT1-2) and chromosome walking was applied to obtain the full-length genes in both species. The mating type-specific primers designed in this study could distinguish between the morphologically similar D. pini and D. septosporum as well as between the different mating types of these species Screening of isolates from global collections of D. septosporum, the pathogen that has spread throughout P. radiata plantations of the southern hemisphere, showed that only MAT2 isolates are present in Australian and New Zealand collections, where only the asexual form of the fungus have been found. In contrast, both mating types of D. septosporum were present in collections from Canada where the sexual state of the fungus is known. Intriguingly, collections from South Africa, where the sexual state of the fungus is unknown, , included both mating types. In D. pini, for which no teleomorph is known, both mating types were present in collections from the United States of America. These results provided new insights into the biology and global distribution of two of the world‚s most important pine pathogens and they should facilitate management of the diseases caused by these fungi.
S2077	R. R. Burlakoti;S. Ali;G. A. Secor;S. M. Neate;M. P. McMullen;T. B. Adhikari	2008	Genetic relationships among populations of Gibberella zeae from barley, wheat, potato and sugar beet in the Upper Midwest of the United States	Phytopathology							Gibberella zeae, a causal agent of Fusarium head blight (FHB) in wheat and barley, is one of the most economically harmful pathogens of cereals in the United States. In recent years, the known host range of G. zeae has also expanded to non-cereal crops. However, there is a lack of information on the population genetic structure of G. zeae associated with non-cereal crops and across wheat cultivars. To test the hypothesis that G. zeae populations sampled from barley, wheat, potato, and sugar beet in the Upper Midwest of the United States are not mixtures of species or G. zeae clades, we analyzed sequence data of G. zeae, and confirmed that all populations studied were present in the same clade of G. zeae. Ten variable number tandem repeat (VNTR) markers were used to determine the genetic structure of G. zeae from the four crop populations. To examine the effect of wheat cultivars on the pathogen populations, 227 strains were sampled from 10 subpopulations according to wheat cultivar types. VNTR markers were used to analyze the genetic structure of these subpopulations. In all populations, gene (H = 0.453 to 0.612) and genotype diversity (GD = > 0.984) were high. There was little or no indication of linkage disequilibrium (r¯d) in all G. zeae populations and subpopulations. In addition, high gene flow (Nm) values were observed between cereal and non-cereal populations (Nm = 10.69) and between FHB resistant and susceptible wheat cultivar subpopulations (Nm = 16.072), suggesting low population differentiation of G. zeae in this region. Analysis of molecular variance (AMOVA) also revealed high genetic variation (> 80%) among individuals within populations and subpopulations. However, low genetic variation (< 5%) was observed between cereal and non-cereal populations and between resistant and susceptible wheat subpopulations. Overall, these results suggest that the populations or subpopulations are likely a single large population of G. zeae affecting crops in the Upper Midwest of the United States.
S2171	S. J. MacKenzie;N. A. Peres;M. P. Barquero;L. F. Arauz;L. W. Timmer	2008	Host range and genetic relatedness of Colletotrichum acutatum isolates from fruit crops and leatherleaf fern in Florida	Phytopathology							Isolates of C. acutatum were collected from anthracnose-affected strawberry, leatherleaf fern, and Key lime; ripe rot-affected blueberry; and postbloom fruit drop (PFD)-affected sweet orange in Florida. Additional isolates from ripe rot-affected blueberry were collected from Georgia and North Carolina and from anthracnose-affected leatherleaf fern in Costa Rica. Based on sequence data from the ITS1-5.8S rRNA-ITS2 region of the rDNA repeat (ITS), the glutaraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase intron 2 (G3PD), and the glutamine synthase intron 2 (GS), isolates from the same host were identical or very similar to each other and distinct from those isolated from other hosts. Isolates from leatherleaf fern in Florida were the only exception. Among these isolates, there were two distinct G3PD and GS sequences that occurred in three of four possible combinations. Only one of these combinations occurred in Costa Rica. Although maximum parsimony trees constructed from genomic regions individually displayed little or no homoplasy, there was a lack of concordance among genealogies that was consistent with a history of recombination. This lack of concordance was particularly evident within a clade containing PFD, Key lime and leatherleaf fern isolates. Pathogenicity tests on blueberry and strawberry fruit; foliage of Key lime, leatherleaf fern, and strawberry; and citrus flowers showed that all isolates were highly pathogenic to their host of origin. Isolates were not pathogenic on foliage of heterologous hosts, however, several nonhomologous isolates were mildly or moderately pathogenic to citrus flowers and blueberry isolates were pathogenic to strawberry fruit. Overall, the data indicated that it is unlikely a pathogenic strain from one of the hosts examined would move to another of these hosts and produce a disease epidemic. There was also evidence that new strains may be produced by recombination among isolates for which no sexual stage has ever been observed.
S364	S. Ekman;M. Wedin	2000	The phylogeny of the families Lecanoraceae and Bacidiaceae (lichenized Ascomycota) inferred from nuclear SSU rDNA sequences	Plant Biology	2	3	350-360	10.1055/s-2000-3703		Lichens; Lecanorales; Lecanoraceae; Bacidiaceae; ribosomal DNA; molecular phylogeny; ascus	The phylogeny of the families Lecanoraceae and Bacidiaceae (Lecanorales, Ascomycota) was investigated using nuclear small subunit ribosomal DNA sequences. Phylogenetic estimations were performed with maximum parsimony and maximum likelihood optimality criteria. In the most parsimonious and most likely reconstructions, the Bacidiaceae sensu Hafellner 1988 forms a monophyletic group and the Lecanoraceae sensu Hafellner a paraphyletic group. The genera Tephromela and Scoliciosporum appear to belong outside these families. A Kishino-Hasegawa test indicated that a phylogeny where the Bacidiaceae and Lecanoraceae, excluding Tephromela and Scoliciosporum, are both monophyletic cannot be rejected. Three hypotheses were rejected, viz. (1) that the Lecanoraceae and Bacidiaceae together form a monophyletic group, (2) that both the Lecanoraceae (incl. Scoliciosporum) and Bacidiaceae (incl. Tephromela) are monophyletic, and (3) that the ascus apex anatomy reflects phylogeny. The suborder Lecanorineae is paraphyletic unless the Stereocaulaceae and Cladoniaceae are included. One or both of the Bacidia- and Lecanora-types of ascus have probably evolved at least twice.
S622	H. T. Lumbsch;R. Lindemuth;I. Schmitt	2000	Evolution of Filamentous Ascomycetes Inferred from LSU rDNA Sequence Data	Plant Biology	2	5	525-529			Fungi; lichens; Ascomycotina; ribosomal DNA; molecular phylogeny; ascoma types	The nuclear LSU rRNA gene was examined in order to evaluate the current phylogeny of ascomycetes, which is mainly based on nuclear SSU rRNA data. Partial LSU rRNA gene sequences of 19 ascomycetes were determined and aligned with the corresponding sequences of 13 other ascomycetes retrieved from Genbank, including all classes traditionally distinguished and most of the recently accepted classes. The classification based on SSU rDNA data and morphological characters is supported, while the traditional classification and classifications based on the ascus-type are rejected. Ascomycetes with perithecia and cleistothecia form monophyletic groups, while the discomycetes are a paraphyletic assemblage. The Pezizales are basal to all other filamentous ascomycetes. The monophyly of Loculoascomycetes is uncertain. The results of the LSU rDNA analysis agree with those of the SSU rDNA and RPB2 gene analyses, suggesting that most classes circumscribed in the filamentous ascomycetes are monophyletic. The branching order and relationships among these classes, however, cannot be elucidated with any of these data sets.
S2135	K. Hoffmann;K. Voigt	2008	Absidia parricida plays a predominant role in biotrophic fusion parasitism among mucoralean fungi (Zygomycetes): Lentamyces, a new genus for A. parricida and A. zychae	Plant Biology							Within the order Mucorales (Zygomycetes), the facultative parasites Parasitella parasitica, Chaetocladium brefeldii, Chaetocladium jonesii, and Absidia parricida are known to initiate biotrophic fusion parasitic interactions on a wide variety of other mucoralean hosts. Their phylogenetic relationship within the Mucorales as well as their ability to form parasitic structures with several known host species was examined. Together with interspecific reactions between the mycoparasites, it could be stated out, that (i) no differences are evident in the spectrum of non-parasitic hosts tested within this study, (ii) Absidia parricida parasitizes all other fusion parasites, (iii) Absidia parricida is ancestral to all other parasites, (iv) Absidia parricida is reported for the first time as phylogenetically basal to all other mucoralean fungi except the Umbelopsidaceae, and (v) based on phylogenetic analyses as well as physiological and morphological characteristics the slow growing species Absidia parricida and Absidia zychae are removed from the genus Absidia and reclassified in the newly described genus Lentamyces.
S1201	L. Kiss;S. Takamatsu;J. H. Cunnington	2004	Molecular identification of Oidium neolycopersici as the causal agent of the recent tomato powdery mildew epidemics in North America	Plant Disease							A previous morphological study of Oidium anamorphs responsible for the recent tomato powdery mildew outbreaks worldwide suggested that, despite controversial data in the literature, these epidemics were caused solely by a newly erected species, O. neolycopersici, in North America. We report here the first molecular evidence that the North American anamorphs belong, indeed, to O. neolycopersici. The ITS sequences of the North American anamorphs determined in this study were identical with those determined for three Japanese and two European specimens of O. neolycopersici and differed from the ITS sequences of two other European specimens in only one base in the ITS2 region. A morphological study confirmed that all the North American Oidium anamorphs included in this study produced conidia singly similar to O. neolycopersici. They were readily distinguished from O. lycopersici which produces conidia in chains and it is known to infect tomato only in Australia. The phylogenetic analysis showed that O. neolycopersici is a distinct powdery mildew species, and it is neither identical nor closely related to an anamorph of a known polyphagous species of the Erysiphaceae. Apparently, it was introduced to the USA and Canada only in the 1990s, but its origin is still unknown.
S1175	S. Rooney Latham;A. Eskalen;W. D. Gubler	2004	Teleomorph formation of Phaeoacremonium aleophilum, cause of esca and grapevine decline in California	Plant Disease							Phaeoacremonium is a recently described genus of the hyphomycetes and includes species associated with grapevine declines worldwide. Spores of Phaeoacremonium spp. have been trapped in infested vineyards, but neither asexual nor sexual fruiting structures have been observed in the field. Mating studies were carried out to determine if California Pm. aleophilum isolates are capable of forming a teleomorph in vitro. Sterilized grapevine shavings were placed on the surface of water agar plates with pairs of different California isolates of Pm. aleophilum, an isolate from the holotype of Pm. aleophilum, plus other related Phaeoacremonium spp. After approximately 28-35 days, mature perithecia were seen forming on wood chips and agar of many pairings. Upon maturation, fertile perithecia had gelatinous droplets of ascospores oozing from their ostioles. Successful crosses, resulting in mature perithecia, corresponded to a heterothallic mating type system. When F1 progeny were crossed back with their parents, heterothallism was confirmed. Molecular analyses of the ITS region of the nuclear ribosomal DNA from ascospore progeny and perithecia confirmed that these perithecia were the teleomorph of Pm. aleophilum, Togninia minima. Furthermore, 6 months after moist incubating grapevine pieces from naturally infected vineyards, mature perithecia of T. minima could be seen forming on the xylem and pith tissues, suggesting both mating types occur on the same vine.
S2363	T. I. Burgess;J. L. Webster;J. A. Ciampini;D. W. White;G. E. S. J. Hardy;M. J. C. Stuckley	2008	Re-evaluation of Phytophthora species isolated during 30 years of vegetation health surveys in Western Australia using molecular techniques	Plant Disease	93	3	215-223	10.1094/pdis-93-3-0215			For 30 years large-scale aerial photography has been used to map the extent of Phytophthora dieback disease in native forests in the south-west of Western Australia, with validation of the observations involving routine testing of soil and root samples for the presence of Phytophthora cinnamomi. In addition to P. cinnamomi, six morpho-species have been identified using this technique: P. citricola, P. megasperma, P. cryptogea, P. drechsleri, P. nicotianae and P. boehmeriae. In recent years many new Phytophthora species have been described world-wide, often with similar morphology to existing species, thus, as many of the isolates collected in Western Australia have been difficult to identify based on morphology, molecular identification of some of the morpho-species is required. Based on amplification of the internal transcribed spacer (ITS) region of the rDNA gene sequence data of over 230 isolates were compared to that of existing species and undescribed taxa. P. inundata, P. asparagi P. taxon PgChlamydo, P. taxon personii, and P. taxon niederhauserii were identified based on sequence data. Phylogenetic analysis revealed that nine potentially new and undescribed taxa can be distinguished. Several of the new taxa are morphologically indistinguishable from species such as P. citricola, P. drechsleri, P. megasperma.. In some cases, the new taxa are closely related to species with similar morphology (e.g. P.sp. 4 and P. citricola). However, the DNA sequences of other new taxa such as P.sp. 3 and P.sp. 9 show that they are not closely related to morphologically similar species, P. drechsleri and P. megasperma, respectively . Most of the new taxa have been associated with dying Banksia spp. while P.sp. 2 and P.sp. 4 have also been isolated from dying Eucalyptus marginata (jarrah). Some taxa (P.spp. 3, 6 and 7) appear to have limited distribution, while others like P.sp.4 are widespread.
S2175	M. J. Wunsch;A. H. Baker;D. W. Kalb;G. C. Bergstrom	2009	Characterization of Fusarium oxysporum f. sp. loti forma specialis nov., a monophyletic pathogen causing vascular wilt of birdsfoot trefoil	Plant Disease	93	1	58-66	10.1094/pdis-93-1-0058			A vascular wilt caused by Fusarium oxysporum has been a serious problem for birdsfoot trefoil (Lotus corniculatus) production in parts of New York and Vermont, USA since the 1970s, causing wilt, severe root necrosis, and rapid plant death. Analysis of F. oxysporum isolates causing this disease indicated that the pathogen has a unique host range relative to previously designated F. oxysporum formae speciales and is monophyletic. Pathogenic isolates from New York and Vermont caused severe vascular wilt of trefoil and moderate vascular wilt of pea but no disease on alfalfa, red clover, soybean or dry bean. The host range of trefoil isolates was distinct from F. oxysporum isolates pathogenic to other legumes. F. oxysporum isolates pathogenic to trefoil belonged to a single vegetative compatibility group separate from nonpathogenic isolates and shared identical mitochondrial small subunit rDNA, translation elongation factor 1-alpha, and nuclear rDNA intergenic spacer haplotypes. Phylogenetic analyses of the concatenated sequence data assigned isolates pathogenic to trefoil to a single, well-supported clade distinct from other pathogenic F. oxysporum. We propose designating the fungus Fusarium oxysporum Schlechtendahl emend. Snyder & Hansen f. sp. loti forma specialis nova.
S1160	C. Streten;K. S. Gibb	2004	Genetic variation in Candidatus Phytoplasma	Plant Pathology							Diversity studies of phytoplasmas have shown that the conserved 16S rRNA gene may not distinguish closely related phytoplasmas such as members of Candidatus Phytoplasma australiense. This study examined whether genes that are less conserved than the 16S rRNA gene would distinguish Ca. P. australiense strains that are identical based on their 16S rRNA genes. The capacity to distinguish these phytoplasmas may provide insight into their origin and distribution, and may show a pattern of association with particular plant hosts. Sequence analysis of the tuf gene and rp operon showed that Ca. P. australiense strains could be differentiated into four subgroups, which were named 16SrXII-B(tuf-Australia I)(rp-A), 16SrXII-B(tuf-New Zealand I; rp-B), 16SrXII-B(tuf-New Zealand II) and 16SrXII-B (rp-C). Strawberry lethal yellows 1 (SLY1), strawberry green petal (SGP), Australian grapevine yellows, pumpkin yellow leaf curl and cottonbush witches‚ broom phytoplasmas were designated members of 16SrXII-B (tuf-Australia I; rp-A) subgroup. The strawberry lethal yellows 2 and cottonbush reduced yellow leaves phytoplasmas were assigned to 16SrXII (tuf-New Zealand II; rp-B) subgroup. No relationship was observed between these phytoplasma subgroups and collection date, location or host plant. However, the study revealed evolutionary divergence in the 16SrXII group.
S1895	Y. Seko;A. Bolay;L. Kiss;V. P. Heluta;B. Grigaliunaite;S. Takamatsu	2007	Molecular evidence supports recent migration of a powdery mildew fungus of Syringa spp. (lilacs) into Europe from East Asia	Plant Pathology							A preliminary analysis demonstrated that the powdery mildew fungus infecting Syringa spp. (lilacs) in different parts of the world is divided into two groups (S-type and K-type) based on the nucleotide sequences of the rDNA ITS regions. In spite of the marked genetic differences (only ca. 94% similarity between ITS types), fungi belonging to these two ITS groups are difficult to distinguish based on morphological characteristics. To determine their geographical distribution, the ITS haplotypes were determined for a total of 139 powdery mildew specimens collected in Asia, Europe, and North and South America between 1977&#8211;2005. Curiously, until 1990, only the S-type was found in Europe whilst the K-type prevailed in East Asia. The first European specimen belonging to the K-type was collected in Ukraine in 1991. Other European K-type samples were collected in Lithuania and Switzerland in 2000, and in other countries after 2002. The incidence of the S-type decreased rapidly in Europe after the 1990s. This result strongly suggests that the K-type was introduced to Europe from East Asia in the 1990s and expanded from Eastern Europe westward, replacing the S-type present on the European lilacs. The K-type produces abundant chasmothecia (sexual fruiting bodies), whereas chasmothecia on the S-type are rare in Europe and East Asia. It is likely that the recent abundant chasmothecia production on Syringa spp. in Central Europe is explained by the migration of the K-type to Europe.
S2139	C. S. Lima;L. H. Pfenning;S. S. Costa;M. A. Campos;J. F. Leslie	2008	A new Fusarium lineage within the Gibberella fujikuroi species complex is the main causal agent of mango malformation disease in Brazil	Plant Pathology							Mango malformation is a serious disease in tropical and subtropical areas of the world and has been attributed to various Fusarium spp., including F. mangiferae, F. proliferatum, F. sacchari, F. sterilihyphosum and F. subglutinans. Isolates of Fusarium associated with mango malformation from Brazil, Egypt, India, South Africa and the United States were evaluated through amplified fragment length polymorphisms (AFLPs) and partial DNA sequences of the genes encoding beta-tubulin (tub2) and translation elongation factor 1-alpha (tef1). These techniques were used to delimit species and to estimate the genetic and phylogenetic relatedness of the isolates. In the AFLP analysis, most of the Brazilian isolates formed a unique cluster. Additionally, one small cluster was formed by isolates of F. sterilihyphosum from Brazil and South Africa, and another by isolates of F. mangiferae from Egypt, India, South Africa and the United States. In the phylogenetic analysis, most of the Brazilian isolates represented a new phylogenetic lineage in the Gibberella fujikuroi species complex, where they formed a sister clade to F. sterilihyphosum. Representatives of both clades were pathogenic to mango (cv. Tommy Atkins) and Koch‚s postulates were completed for isolates belonging to the new lineage and to F. sterilihyphosum. Thus, most of the mango malformation disease in Brazil is due to a distinct phylogenetic lineage of Fusarium, and to a lesser extent by F. sterilihyphosum. The new phylogenetic lineage identified in this study, together with F. mangiferae and F. sterilihyphosum, are the only known taxa of Fusarium proven to be capable of causing mango malformation.
S2225	C. A. Pérez;M. J. Wingfield;B. Slippers;N. Altier;R. A. Blanchette	2008	Neofusicoccum eucalyptorum, a Eucalyptus pathogen, on native Myrtaceae in Uruguay	Plant Pathology							Neofusicoccum eucalyptorum is a canker-associated fungus apparently highly specialized on Eucalyptus. However, when surveying the microbial population inhabiting native Myrtaceae trees in Uruguay, fungal cultures resembling N. eucalyptorum were isolated. This intriguing occurrence of N. eucalyptorum on hosts other than Eucalyptus prompted a study to confirm the identity of the cultures and to compare them with isolates from Eucalyptus species. Several surveys were conducted throughout Uruguay to obtain samples from native forests, focusing primarily on those species residing in the Myrtaceae family. Fungal identification was based on morphology and confirmed using comparison sequences for the internal transcribed spacer (ITS) of the rDNA operon. Pathogenicity was evaluated by inoculating plants of an E. grandis clone. Morphology and molecular identification confirmed the occurrence of N. eucalyptorum on Blepharocalyx salicifolius, Myrceugenia glaucescens and Myrrhinium atropurpureum var. octandrum. This is the first report of N. eucalyptorum occurring in hosts other than Eucalyptus. Pathogenicity tests confirmed the ability of this species to produce cankers and showed cross pathogenicity among hosts. This study provides information that will assist breeding programs in attempts to obtain disease resistant Eucalyptus plantations and it also suggests that a Eucalyptus pathogen could have moved to native trees in Uruguay.
S2166	G. E. Hoffman;M. V. S. Puerta;C. F. Delwiche	2008	Gene Families, Biochemistry And The Inference Of Function In Algal Light-Harvesting Complex Proteins	Plant Physiology							Light harvesting complex (LHC) proteins function in photosynthesis by binding chlorophyll (Chl) and carotenoid molecules that absorb light and transfer the energy to the reaction center Chl of the photosystem. Studies of LHCs from chlorophyte algae and plants have characterized LHCs that have a diversity of biochemical functions, expression patterns and amino acid sequences. Members of different subfamilies of LHCs have been shown to differ in photosystem specificity, carotenoid binding, and their associations with other LHCs. In addition, some LHCs play a role in photoprotection from excess light. Previous phylogenetic studies of LHCs from organisms that use Chl a and c suggested that individual lineages of chromalveolate algae possess proteins from one or two subfamilies, and that most subfamilies are specific to the algal lineage. However, presence of LHC sequences of unexpected types in a variety of genomic data has suggested that this may be an oversimplification. This study uses expressed sequence tag, complete genome and individual genomic data to reconstruct the phylogeny of part of the LHC family. The phylogeny indicates that individual taxa possess proteins from multiple LHC subfamilies and that disparate algal lineages contain members of the same LHC subfamilies. Comparison of the gene phylogeny with expression and biochemical data is consistent with hypotheses of functional differentiation, and suggests a complex evolution of function, gene transfer, and lineage-specific diversification. The divergence of function between proteins with relatively similar amino acid sequences illustrates the complexity of protein families and the difficulty of inferring biochemical function from simple similarity searches.
S2x4x96c17c14c22	J. G. Conran	1989	Cladistic analysis of some net-veined Lilliaflorae	Plant Systematics and Evolution	168		123-141				Comparisons between previous intuitive or phenetic classifications of the netveined Liliiflorae was used to determine a suitable group of taxa for cladistic analyses. The resultant 48 genera and generic groupings comprising 19 families from within the Asparagales, Liliales and Dioscoreales were then analysed. The cladistics largely supported previous treatments, with the Liliales, Dioscoreales and Asparagales all monophyletic.
S254	A. W. Meerow	1989	Biosystematics of two sympatric species of Eucharis (Amaryllidaceae)	Plant Systematics and Evolution	166	1-2	11-30				Eucharis candida and E. formosa are two often sympatric species of bulbous geophytes restricted to neotropical rain forest understory. The species are most common in eastern Ecuador, and are the only two east Ecuadorean species of the genus found north of the Pastaza valley. Data from phenetic, karyotypic, and preliminary isozyme electrophoretic analyses of both species are represented. The species are distinguishable phenetically and karyologically, but isozyme-based relationships are more complex. Phenetic resolution of the isozyme phenotypes supports recognition of two species in Ecuador. A Peruvian isolate of E. formosa, though not morphologically distinct, shows both allozyme and chromosomal divergence from Ecuadorean populations. Cladistic relationships based on overall allozyme data do not support species distinction, but a novel electrophoretic phenotype for glutathione reductase is shared only by individuals of E. candida. An apparent geographic component within the monophyletic groups resolved in the cladogram suggests that some degree of gene flow between these two species has been maintained without the complete loss of morphological species identity. This may have been mediated either by artificial population structures due to a probable long history of cultivation, or via Pleistocene refugia effects. Both species may have originated in eastern Ecuador from a common ancestral population which has since radiated outward, perhaps several times.
S2x3x96c17c11c47	R. J. Soreng;J. I. Davis;J. J. Doyle	1990	A phylogenetic analysis of chloroplast DNA restriction site variation in Poaceae subfam. Pooideae	Plant Systematics and Evolution	172		83-97				A phylogenetic analysis was conducted on chloroplast DNA restriction site variation in 34 genera of grasses (family Poaceae), including 28 genera from subfam. Pooideae (representing tribes Aveneae, Brachypodieae, Bromeae, Meliceae, Poeae, Stipeae, and Triticeae) and representatives of three other subfamilies, Arundinoideae, Oryzoideae, and Panicoideae. Analyses of all 34 genera always distinguished Pooideae as monophyletic, regardless of which nonpooid genus functioned as outgroup; six separate analyses of all 28 pooid genera. each including one of the six nonpooid genera as outgroup, resolved five identically constituted clades within Pooideae (in four cases), or (in the other two cases) yielded results that were less well resolved, but not in conflict with those of the other four analyses. The four best-resolved analyses distinguished Meliceae as the earliest diverging lineage within Pooideae, and Stipeae as the next. Above the point of divergence of Stipeae is a dichotomy between supertribe Triticodae (including tribes Brachypodieae, Bromeae, and Triticeae), and a clade comprising Poeae and Aveneae. The analysis supports some tribal realignments, specifically the assignment of Briza, Chascolytrum, Microbriza, and Torreyochloa to Aveneae, and Arctagrostis, Catabrosa, and Sesleria to Poeae. The analysis also suggests that the pooid spikelet (i.e., glumes shorter than lemmas and florets two or more) is plesiomorphic in Pooideae, and that spikelets with one floret, and those with glumes longer than the first lemma, each have evolved more than once within Pooideae. Results also indicate that small chromosomes and chromosome numbers based on x=c. 10-12 are plesiomorphic within Pooideae. Alternative states of these characters (chromosomes large, chromosome numbers based on x= 7) are interpreted as synapomorphies or parallelisms of clades that include Triticodae, Aveneae, and Poeae. Lanceolate lodicule shape may be a synapomorphy of the clade that includes Stipeae, Triticodae, Aveneae, and Poeae, and loss of lodicule vascularization a synapomorphy of the entire Pooideae.
S1x28x96c16c45c36	A. A. Anderberg	1991	Taxonomy and phylogeny of the tribe Inuleae (Asteraceae)	Plant Systematics and Evolution	176		75-123				The interrelationships of the tribe Inulea s. str. have been analysed with a computerized parsimony program (Hennig 86), using the Arctotideae as functional outgroup. The results are illustrated with a cladogram and a strict consensus tree. A detailed character discussion is presented. Descriptions of all genera are supplied with brief notes on distribution, references to chemical investigations, and chromosome numbers. Lists of recognized species are also presented in connection to each genus, respectively. 21 new combinations are made, one new genus, Xerolekia A. ANDERB., is described, Mollera is reduced to a synonym of Calostephane, and the genus Duhaldea is resuscitated. Anisopappus was found to be a paraphyletic basal group in the tribe. The paleate genera Asteriscus, Nauplills, lghermia, Buphthalmum and Xerolekia form one monophyletic group. lnula and other, similar genera were found to constitute the ancestral complex of the Pulicaria group.
S1x28x96c16c55c20	A. A. Anderberg	1991	Taxonomy and phylogeny of the tribe Plucheeae (Asteraceae)	Plant Systematics and Evolution	176		145-177				The tribe Plucheeae (BENTH.) A. ANDERB., has been analysed cladistically by means of a computerized parsimony program (Hennig86), using the Arctotideae as outgroup. The results of the analysis are presented in a consensus tree and one cladogram. Four major monophyletic subgroups can be recognized: The Coleocoma group (3 genera), the Pterocaulon group (3 genera), the Laggera group (6 genera), and the Pluchea group (12 genera). All recognized genera are described and most genera are supplied with taxonomical notes including comments on their taxonomic status. Genera such as Blumea, Pluchea, and Epaltes are demonstrated to be unnatural assemblages. Monarrhenus and Tessaria are both closely related to the Pluchea complex. The old generic name Litogyne HARV. has been taken up for one species of Epaltes, the genus Rhodogeron is reduced to a synonym of Sachsia, and the following new combinations are made; Litogyne gariepina (DC.) A. ANDERB., and Sachsia coronopifolia (GRISEB.) A. ANDERB.
S2x2x96c15c51c48	J. T. Johansson;R. K. Jansen	1991	Chloroplast DNA variation among five species of Ranunculaceae: Structure, sequence divergence, and phylogenetic relationships	Plant Systematics and Evolution	178	1-2	9-25	10.1007/BF00937979			A restriction site map of the chloroplast genome of Caltha palustris L. (Ranunculaceae) has been constructed for 13 restriction endonucleases using filter hybridization with cloned tobacco chloroplast DNA fragments. A size of 153.8kb has been estimated for the Caltha chloroplast genome. Forty-six chloroplast genes and four open reading frames have been mapped using small tobacco chloroplast gene probes. Chloroplast DNA sequence divergence has been estimated for all pairs of five species of Ranunculaceae, Caltha palustris, Ranunculus bulbosus, R. fascicularis, R. recurvatus, and Trollius ledebourii, and ranges between 0.2% and 9.6% for the total genome. Divergence values are much higher in the small and large single copy regions than in the inverted repeat. Phylogenetic relationships between the five species have been hypothesized using chloroplast DNA restriction site mapping. One hundred and six informative restriction site mutations have been detected using eleven restriction endonucleases. Cladistic analyses of the restriction site mutations have been performed using Wagner and Dollo parsimony algorithms, and confidence intervals have been calculated for the resulting monophyletic groups using bootstrapping. It is demonstrated that restriction site comparisons are applicable to the Ranunculaceae on intergeneric level, with the exception of groups having extensive genomic rearrangements. Moreover, sequence divergence is low enough at the interspecific level to allow phylogenetic analyses within genera such as Ranunculus.
S2x4x96c14c39c34	K. J. Kim;T. J. Mabry	1991	Phylogenetic and evolutionary implications of nuclear ribosomal DNA variation in dwarf dandelions (Krigia, Lactuceae, Ateraceae)	Plant Systematics and Evolution	177		53-69				Restriction site and length variations of nrDNA were examined for 51 populations of seven species of Krigia. The nrDNA repeat ranged in size from 8.7 to 9.6 kilobase (kb). The transcribed region, including the two ITSs, was 5.35 kb long in all examined Krigia populations. In contrast, the size of the nontranscribed IGS varied from 3.35 to 4.25 kb. Eight different types of length-variations were identified among the 51 populations, including distinct nrDNA lengths in the tetraploid and diploid populations of both K biflora and K virginica. However, a few variations were detected among populations of the same species or within a cytotype. All populations of Krigia sect. Cymbia share a 600 bp insertion in IGS near the 18 S gene, and this feature suggests monophyly of the section. All Krigia spp. had a conjugated type of subrepeat composed of approximately 75 basepairs (bp) and 125 bp. Base modifications in the gene coding regions were highly conserved among species. Forty-five restriction sites from 15 enzymes were mapped, 24 of which were variable among populations. Only four of the variable sites occurred in the rRNA coding region while 20 variable sites were detected in the noncoding regions. Collectively, 25 enzymes generated about 66 restriction sites in each nrDNA; this amounts to about 4.3% of the nrDNA repeat. A total of 50 restriction sites was variable, 28 of which were phylogenetically informative. Phylogenetic analyses of site mutations indicated that two sections of Krigia, sect. Cymbia and sect. Krigia, are monophyletic. In addition, relationships among several species were congruent with other sources of data, such as cpDNA restriction site variation and morphology. Both length and restriction site variation supported an allopolyploid origin of the hexaploid K montana. The average sequence divergence value in Krigia nrDNA was 40 times greater than that of the chloroplast DNA. The rapid evolution of nrDNA sequences was primarily due to changes of the IGS sequences.
S2x3x96c12c06c23	H. Kurzweil;H. P. Linder;P. Chesselet	1991	The phylogeny and evolution of the Pterygodium-Corycium complex (Coryciinae, Orchidaceae)	Plant Systematics and Evolution	175		161-223				The leaf-anatomy, palynology, seed-morphology, vegetative morphology and especially the highly complicated floral morphology of the Coryciinae s. str. (Diseae. Orchidoideae. Orchidaceae) are described and illustrated in detail. On the basis of these characters the presumed phylogeny, based on a rigorous cladistic analysis, is presented. The cladistic biogeographical analysis of the Coryciinae s. str. shows that it is a member of the Afrotemperate Track, with a pattern of vicariance events typical of the members of this track. An analysis of the patterns of speciation shows that allopatric speciation appears to be rare, and that parapatric speciation across edaphic boundaries may be the most important factor. Proceeding from the information presented, a new classification of the group is proposed in which we recognize the four genera Ceratandra, Evotella, Pterygodium and Corycium. The new monotypic genus Evotella comprises a species originally described as Pterygodium rubiginosum. The three species of the genus Anochilus are transferred to Corycium and Pterygodium. P. magnum, which was originally described as Pterygodium but was transferred to Corycium lately, is placed in a monotypic section of Pterygodium.
S1x28x96c17c16c10	M. Bolliger;U. Molau	1992	Nothobartsia, a new genus of Scrophulariaceae from southwest Europe	Plant Systematics and Evolution	179		59-71				Recent systematic studies of Bartsia and Odontites showed the necessity to exclude the closely related perennial species Bartsia aspera (Portugal and northern Morocco) and Bartsia spicata (Central Pyrenees) from the genus Bartsia as a segregate genus named Nothobartsia. Morphologically this new genus combines characteristic features of Bartsia and of Odontites. Its autonomous systematic position is supported by the cladistic analysis, showing that Nothobartsia represents a relatively primitive genus standing close to the common ancestral root of Bartsia, Euphrasia, and Odontites.
S1x29x96c16c10c34	G. N. Feliner	1992	Multivariate and cladistic analyses of the purple-flowered species of Erysimum (Cruciferae) from the Iberian Peninsula	Plant Systematics and Evolution	180		15-28				A taxonomically difficult purple-flowered group within the genus Erysimum, restricted to the Iberian Peninsula, is analyzed by multivariate and cladistic analyses. 51 specimens have been scored for 14 characters. Both principal components and discriminant analyses provide support to the recognition of the five species considered by the author, namely E. Iinifolium, E. Iagascae, E. baeticum, E. popovii, and E. cazorlense. Cladistic analysis, using 7 characters resulted in a single most parsimonious cladogram containing no homoplasies. The pattern of morphologic divergence follows a clear NW.-SE. trend, which is congruent with the topology of the cladogram. This trend significantly affects growth-form as well as fruit characters, both providing the main grounds for species recognition. The different behavior and significance of several characters in both kinds of analysis is discussed. The co-occurrence of morphologically similar individuals differing in the flower color is discussed, too. Possible explanations for this phenomenon involve hybridization in a wide sense or, alternatively, rejecting the assumption of monophyly for the group.
S246	D. Govindaraju;P. Lewis;C. Cullis	1992	Phylogenetic analysis of pines using ribosomal DNA restriction fragment length polymorphisms	Plant Systematics and Evolution	179		141-153				Phylogenetic relationships among 30 species of the genus Pinus were studied using restriction site polymorphism in the large subunit of nuclear rDNA. Of the 58 restriction sites scored, 48 were phylogenetically informative, and the 30 species reduced to ten taxa when species with identical restriction site patterns were combined. These ten taxa corresponded to the currently recognized subsections of the genus, with the sole exception of P. Ieiophylla, which was identical in its pattern of restriction sites to all three species included from subsect. Oocarpae despite its being in a different section of sub. Pinus (Pinea instead of Pinus). A measure of the proportion of phylogenetic information contained within the data set (Homoplasy Excess Ratio, or HER) revealed that the character states were significantly non randomly distributed among the ten taxa (HER = 0.71, p < 0.01). Branchand bound searches using either Wagner or Dollo parsimony as the optimization criterion were carried out using PAUP in order to estimate phylogenetic relationships among the ten taxa. Three taxa (Picea pungens, Tsuga canadensis, and Larix decidua) were used independently as outgroups for purposes of rooting the trees. Despite the extreme differences in the assumptions underlying the Wagner and Dollo parsimony, the two gave surprisingly similar estimates of phylogeny, with both analyses supporting the monophyly of the two major subgenera Pinus and Strobus and differing in topology only in the placement of subsect. Ponderosae within subgenus Pinus. The likelihood for the Wagner tree was only slightly higher than that computed for the Dollo tree. Gymnosperms, Conifers, Pinaceae, Pinus.—rDNA, restriction fragments, molecular systematics, evolution, phylogeny.
S11x5x95c18c15c41	D. W. Taylor;L. J. Hickey	1992	Phylogenetic evidence for the herbaceous origin or angiosperms	Plant Systematics and Evolution	180		137-156				The ancestral angiosperm is commonly interpreted as an arborescent to shrubby magnolialean with large, multiparted, complex flowers. We examined this hypothesis using a phylogenetic analysis of new and reevaluated characters polarizabled with outgroup comparison. Our cladistic analysis of basal angiosperms placed the nonmagnolialean Chloranthaceae and Piperaceae at the bottom of the tree. We further inferred the probable ancestral states of characters not polarizable with outgroup comparison by examining their distribution among taxa at the base of our cladogram. The sum of ancestral character states suggests that the protoangiosperm was a diminutive, rhizomatous to scrambling perennial herb, with small, simple flowers.
S2x7x96c16c52c23	P. O. Karis	1993	Heliantheae sensu lato (Asteraceae), clades and classification	Plant Systematics and Evolution	188		139-195				The interrelationships within the Heliantheae s. lato and the closely related Eupatorieae are analyzed and discussed. The basis to this discussion is a cladistic analysis of 141 morphological characters (172 apomorphic states) scored for 97 genera. The Heleniae s. lato, a subgroup of the Heliantheae s. lato, are paraphyletic, and a monophyletic group corresponding largely to the Heliantheae s. str. is recognized. The Ecliptinae sensu ROBINSON are polyphyletic. The Coreopsidinae form an ingroup in the Heliantheae s. str. The Tageteae (Pectidinae) and the Madieae (Madiinae) are two separate branches within the helenioida assemblage of taxa.
S2x3x96c13c41c44	G. Peterson;J. F. Doebley	1993	Chloroplast DNA variation in the genus Secale (Poaceae)	Plant Systematics and Evolution	187		115-125				The chloroplast genomes of 44 accessions of Secale were surveyed for restriction site polymorphisms. The accessions were chosen to represent the geographic as well as taxonomic range of the genus. Using 12 restriction enzymes a total of 348 sites were detected. Twenty-nine mutation sites were phylogenetically informative and used in a cladistic analysis. Further, a 0.1 kb insertion separated Secale from the outgroup species. Only the annual species S. sylvestre was distinct from the rest of the taxa. Cultivated rye together with both wild annual and wild perennial accessions were mixed among each other. Sequence divergence (p) among taxa of Secale was low, varying from 0.000 to 0.005, suggesting a rather recent origin of the genus.
S2x3x96c16c49c09	R. M. K. Saunders;K. Fowler	1993	The supraspecific taxonomy and evolution of the fern genus Azolla (Azollaceae)	Plant Systematics and Evolution	184		175-193				The systematics of the aquatic fern genus Azolla LAM. is revised at the supraspecific level. Published morphological data are reviewed, and cytological and cladistic analyses of the genus conducted, enabling a discussion of the putative evolutionary trends in the genus, and a revision of the current taxonomy. A phylogenetically more acceptable subgeneric and sectional classification is proposed, viz. subg. Azolla sect. Azolla (comprising A. filiculoides LAM., A. rubra R. BR., A caroliniana auct. non WILLD., A. microphylla auct. non KAULF. and A. mexicana PRESL), subg. Azolla sect. Rhizosperma (MEY.) METT. (comprising A. pinnata R. BR.), and subg. Tetrasporocarpia subg. nov. (comprising A. nilotica DECNE. ex METT.).
S2x4x96c13c51c12	X. Zhang;K. Bremer	1993	A cladistic analysis of the tribe Astereae (Asteraceae) with notes on their evolution and subtribal classification	Plant Systematics and Evolution	184		259-283				The Astereae were surveyed and the genera arranged in 23 informal groups. The generic groups were used to sample representative genera for a cladistic analysis based on morphological characters. The resulting cladogram was used for discussion of evolution and subtribal classification within the tribe. The lower basic chromosome numbers x = 4, 5, 6, and 8 are interpreted as reductions from a primitive x = 9. The subtribe Grangeinae occupies a phylogenetically basal position as sister group to the rest of the tribe. This may be divided into two large groups, largely corresponding to the homochromous Solidagininae and to the heterochromous Asterinae sensu lato, i.e. including the Bellidinae, Hinterhuberinae, Conyzinae, and Baccharidinae. The latter four subtribes are derived within the Asterinae, and hence reduced to synonymy. Several intercontinental relationships indicate that a geographical subdivision of the tribe should be avoided, although in our analysis most of the groups proved to be restricted to one of five major regions.
S2x16x96c14c28c00	P. Caputo;S. Cozzolino	1994	A cladistic analysis of Dipsacaceae (Dipsacales)	Plant Systematics and Evolution	189		41-61				A cladistic study of Dipsacaceae (Asteridae, Dipsacales) was undertaken, based mainly on morphological and palynological characters, obtained by investigations of herbarium material and from the literature. Outgroups included Morinaceae, Triplostegiaceae, and a subset of Valerianaceae. The consensus tree resulting from three equally parsimonious cladograms shows that Dipsacaceae are divided into two major clades, one with Dipsacus and Cephalaria, the other including the remaining genera. Within the latter clade, Knautia is the sister group of the rest of the taxa. This study is a reappraisal of Dipsacaceae phylogeny, and the results broadly match previous evidence.
S11x5x95c18c34c59	R. Eriksson	1994	Phylogeny of Cyclanthaceae	Plant Systematics and Evolution	190		31-47				The affinities of Cyclanthaceae are discussed, and it is concluded that the sister- group to this family is most probably Pandanaceae. A hypothesis of generic relationships in Cyclanthaceae, based on cladistic methods, is presented. Bootstrap analysis and Bremer support (decay index) have been used to test the strength of individual clades, and the result is compared with previously made phylogenetic analyses. The Sphaeradenia group (Chorigyne, Stelestylis, Sphaeradenia, and Ludovia) is supported as monophyletic and acceptably resolved, while the Asplundia group (remaining genera in Carludovicoideae) may be paraphyletic, with largely uncertain relationships. A formal recognition of these groups is therefore not justifed. The probable character evolution in Carludovicoideae is discussed.
S11x6x95c10c11c33	K. J. Kim;R. K. Jansen	1994	Comparisons of phylogenetic hypotheses among different data sets in dwarf dandelions (Krigia, Asteraceae): Additional information from internal transcribed spacer sequences of nuclear ribosomal DNA	Plant Systematics and Evolution	190		157-185				The internal transcribed spacer (ITS) region of the 18 S-25 S nuclear ribosomal DNA repeat was sequenced from 19 populations of the tribe Lactuceae, including all species of dwarf dandelion (Krigia) and five outgroup genera. The incidence of length changes and base substitutions was at least two times higher for ITS 1 than ITS 2. Interspecific sequence divergence within Krigia averaged 9.62% (1.61%-15.19%) and 4.26% (0%-6.64%) in ITS 1 and ITS 2, respectively. Intergeneric.sequence divergence ranged from 15.6% to 44.5% in ITS 1 and from 8.0% to 28.6% in ITS 2. High sequence divergence and homoplasy among genera of tribe Lactuceae suggest that the phylogenetic utility of ITS sequence data is limited to interspecific studies or comparisons among closely related genera. Trees generated from ITS sequences are essentially identical to those from restriction site comparisons of the entire nuclear ribosomal (nr) DNA region. The degree of tree resolution differed depending on how gaps were treated in phylogenetic analyses. The ITS trees were congruent with the chloroplast DNA and morphological phylogenies in three major ways: 1) the sister group relationship between Krigia and Pyrrhopappus; 2) the recognition of two monophyletic sections, Krigia and Cymbia, in genus Krigia; and 3) the monophyly of the K. occidentalis- K. cespitosa clade in sect. Cymbia.. However, the two nrDNA-based trees are not congruent with morphology/chloroplast DNA-based trees for the interspecific relationships in sect. Krigia. An average of 22.5% incongruence was observed among four Krigia data sets. The relatively high degree of incongruence among data sets is due primarily to conflict between trees based on nrDNA and morphological/cpDNA data. The incongruence is probably due to the concerted evolution of nrDNA repeating units. The results from Krigia and the Lactuceae suggest that nrDNA data may have limited utility in phylogenetic studies of plants, especially in groups which exhibit high levels of sequence divergence. Our combined phylogenetic analysis as a total evidence shows the least conflict to each of the individual data sets.
S2x3x96c17c28c58	B. L. Turner	1994	Systematic study of the genus Eupatoriastrum (Asteraceae, Eupatorieae)	Plant Systematics and Evolution	190		113-127				Eupatoriastrum (including Matudina King & H. Rob.) is a small genus of southern Mexico, Guatemala, and El Salvador. It is characterized by its large convex paleate receptacles which bear numerous florets (100-300). Five species are recognized. Relationships of the genus are discussed, descriptions, complete synonymy, and a hypothetical phyletic diagram of the species are provided. In addition, four of the taxa are illustrated by line drawings.
S2x3x96c17c34c03	R. C. H. J. van Ham;H. Hart	1994	Evolution of Sedum series Rupestria (Crassulaceae): Evidence from chloroplast DNA and biosystematic data	Plant Systematics and Evolution	190	1-2	1-20	10.1007/BF00937855			Evolutionary relationships within the comparium Sedum series Rupestria (Crassulaceae) were investigated by phylogenetic analyses of restriction site variation of the chloroplast genome and morphological variation. DNAs were digested with 21 restriction enzymes and hybridized with S. album cpDNA probes covering the entire genome. A total of 141 ingroup variable restriction sites was identified. Morphological variation was observed in a total of 66 characters. Both datasets were analysed using parsimony methods and compared with evidence from cytology, artificial hybridization and biogeography to infer evolutionary relationships. The results 1) indicate a relatively high level of nucleotide sequence divergence within S. ser. Rupestria; 2) indicate three main lines of plastome differentiation, which are in agreement with morphology, basic chromosome numbers, and centres of diversity; 3) do not provide a compelling solution for basal relationships; 4) support an earlier hypothesis on reticulation and provide evidence for a third case of allopolyploidy in the series; 5) suggest that interspecific gene flow in S. ser. Rupestria is funnelled through the presumably allopolyploid S. rupestre subsp. erectum.
S2x4x96c14c02c58	D. Zink;K. Schumann;W. Nagl	1994	Restriction fragment length polymorphisms of the photohemagglutinin genes in Phaseolus and Vigna (Leguminosae)	Plant Systematics and Evolution	191		131-146				Restriction fragment length polymorphisms at the phytohemagglutinin (PHA) locus were determined among 21 genotypes of Phaseolus vulgaris, P. coccineus, P. acutifolius, P. lunatus, and three Vigna species, using five restriction enzymes and one double digestion, in order to provide molecular evidence for their genetic relatedness. The dissimilarity between genotypes was estimated from binary RFLP data. The dissimilarity was high among species (from 0.75 to 0.95), and of variable extent among genotypes of the same species (0.33-0.89). In P. vulgaris, two different DNA hybridization patterns were found, giving further evidence for two major gene pools in that species. The restriction patterns of P. vulgaris var. aborigineus, the putative ancestral form of P. vulgaris, exhibit clear homology to P. vulgaris genotypes. An undefined landrace from Taiwan could be identified as a P. vulgaris genotype. RFLP-based trees for the phytohemagglutinin genes of the species studied were computed with several distance matrix and parsimony methods.
S2x14x97c16c11c45	T. Eriksson;M. J. Donoghue;M. S. Hibbs	1998	Phylogenetic analysis of Potentilla using DNA sequences of nuclear ribosomal internal transcribed spacers (ITS), and implications for the classification of Rosoideae (Rosaceae)	Plant Systematics and Evolution	211	3-4	155-179	10.1007/BF00985357		Rosaceae Rosoideae Potentilla; Fragaria; Duchesnea; Phylogeny; classification; phylogenetic nomenclature; ribosomal DNA, ITS	The circumscription of Potentilla has varied widely. To investigate the monophyly of Potentilla and the phylogenetic relationships of associated genera we used nuclear ribosomal internal transcribed spacer (ITS) DNA sequences. Fourteen species of Potentilla (sensu WOLF 1908) were included, some of which represent proposed segregate genera (such as Argentina, Comarum, Drymocallis, Duchesnea, Pentaphylloides, and Sibbaldiopsis), and 17 other genera of Rosoideae, using Prunus as outgroup. Out most parsimonious tree strongly implies that Potentilla is not monophyletic. Forcing the monophyly of Potentilla yields distinctly longer trees. Several morphological features appear to have evolved several times independently, including the swollen receptacle (“strawberry”) and temate leaves. In order to minimise nomenclatural change and to name only well supported clades, Potentilla should be split into several genera, while other previously recognised genera such as Duchesnea, Horkelia, and Ivesia are best included in Potentilla. We suggest, however, that a phylogenetic nomenclature (sensu DE QuEraoz & GAUTHIEU 1994) might be a better solution.
S420	N. Wikström;P. Kenrick;M. Chase	1999	Epiphytism and terrestrialization in tropical Huperzia (Lycopodiaceae)	Plant Systematics and Evolution	218	3-4	221-243	10.1007/BF01089229		Lycopodiaceae; Huperzia; Epiphyte; Andes; Neotropics; plastid DNA; trnL; trnF	A phylogenetic analysis of Huperzia (Lycopodiaceae) documents a single origin ofepiphytism and multiple reversals to a terrestrial habit in the Neotropics. Epiphytism evolved prior to the final rifting of South America and Africa, but the origin of most modern species diversity probably postdates the Mid Cretaceous diversification of flowering plants. In this respect, the evolution of Huperzia parallels that of many other Neotropical epiphytic groups. In the Andes, alpine terrestrial species are shown to have evolved from montane epiphytes, an event that correlates well with regional orogenesis during the Miocene. Species from Australia, New Zealand, and Tasmania show diverse relationships with SE Asian groups. Results also indicate that long distance, transoceanic dispersal is rare in these homosporous plants - accounting for less than 5% of species distributions - and that convergence in strobilus and branch morphology is widespread among Paleotropical and Neotropical epiphytes. The phylogenetic analysis is based on a sample of 63 species (ca 15% total species diversity) and data from a ca 1.1kb region of noncoding (intron and spacer sequences) plastid DNA located between the trnL and trnF genes.
S600	S. Liede;A. Täuber	2000	Sarcostemma R. Br. (Apocynaceae - Asclepiadoideae) - a Controversial Generic Circumscription Reconsidered: Evidence from trnL-F Spacers	Plant Systematics and Evolution	225		133-140	10.1007/BF00985463		Gentianales; Apocynaceae; Asclepiadoideae; Blepharodon; Funastrum; Pentacyphus; Philibertia; Platykeleba; Sarcostemma; chloroplast DNA; phylogeny; trnT-trnL spacer; trnL intron; trnL-trnF spacer	The polyphyly of Sarcostemma sensu latu, suspected on morphological and karyological grounds, is confirmed by analysis of the trnL-F spacer region. With the exception of Cynanchum montevidense (subgen. Mellichampia, Sundell 1981), Old World and New World taxa belong to different clades. Sarcostemma sensu stricto and Platykeleba show a strong affinity to Old World Cynanchum; the affinities of Oxystelma cannot be determined at present. Philibertia and Blepharodon are sister groups, both are sister to Funastrum, and Pentacyphus is basal to the New World clade.
S656	G. Bena	2001	Molecular phylogeny supports the morphologically based taxonomic transfer of the "medicagoid" Trigonella species to the genus Medicago L	Plant Systematics and Evolution	229	3-4	217-236	10.1007/s006060170012		Medicago L.; medicagoids; Trigonella L.; molecular phylogeny; ITS; ETS	The taxonomic transfer of the 23 Trigonella species previously known as medicagoids to the genus Medicago L. is reanalyzed on the basis of a molecular phylogenetic approach. The internal and external transcribed spacers of 53 Medicago species s. str. and 10 of the 23 medicagoid species were sequenced. Both maximum parsimony or maximum likelihood criteria joined medicagoid species more confidently with Medicago rather than with Trigonella. The basal position of the medicagoid species within the genus Medicago, together with morphologically atypical Medicago species (such as M. radiata and M. platycarpa), raised the question of the expediency to define a new genus and is discussed, relatively to the support of each clade. Using criteria of monophyly and support, it was concluded that the medicagoids are better joined in Medicago rather than placed in a new genus.
S646	L. Bohs;R. G. Olmstead	2001	A reassessment of Normania and Triguera (Solanaceae)	Plant Systematics and Evolution	228	1-2	33-48	10.1007/s006060170035		Normania; Triguera; Solanum; Macaronesia; ndhF; ITS	Normania and Triguera comprise two genera of the Solanaceae whose affinities have been uncertain. Normania encompasses two species endemic to Macaronesia; Triguera is monotypic and found in Spain and northwestern Africa. Both have slightly zygomorphic flowers and horned anthers that dehisce by both apical pores and longitudinal slits. Micromorphological similarities include trichotomously colporate pollen grains and seed surface cells with radially thickened extensions. Molecular data from the chloroplast ndhF gene and the nuclear ITS region establish that Normania and Triguera are nested within the large genus Solanum, where together they form a well supported clade. However, the relationship of this clade to other Solanum subgroups is not resolved. Transfer of the Normania and Triguera epithets to Solanum is made, necessitating one new name. The molecular data confirm that the species of Solanum endemic to Macaronesia belong to two distinct clades, each showing an independent evolution of heteromorphic anthers.
S761	U. Meve;S. Liede	2002	A molecular phylogeny and generic rearrangement of the stapelioid Ceropegieae (Apocynaceae-Asclepiadoideae)	Plant Systematics and Evolution	234	1-4	171-209	10.1007/s00606-002-0220-2		Apocynaceae-Asclepiadoideae; Caral-luma; Ceropegieae; cpDNA; ITS region; molecular systematics; nrDNA; Richtersveldia; stapeliads; taxonomy; trnT-L spacer; rnL intron; trnL-F spacer	Representatives of nearly all genera of the taxon-rich stem-succulent stapeliads and most of the few related, leafy genera were analyzed. Sequence data from two non-coding molecular markers (ITS region of nrDNA and trnT-L and trnL-F spacers as well as the trnL intron of cpDNA) support the traditional tribal affiliation of the genera, which form a monophyletic group. This monophylum breaks into a basal Neoschumannia/ Anisotoma / Riocreuxia / Sisyranthus clade, from which the core Ceropegieae are derived. The four Ceropegia species included are not monophyletic, and their relationship to Brachystelma changes depending on the marker studied. The stem succulent taxa fall in a number of well supported, but unresolved clades, the most prominent being the predominantly southern African clade comprising Orbea, Stapelia and some other genera. The most derived taxa of NE Africa, Duvaliandra and White-sloanea, are basal to this southern African clade. The other clades comprise the more basal genera of stem-succulent stapeliads, including the members of the Caralluma complex. Of the 17 genera accepted by Plowes for the Caralluma complex, seven are recognized: Caralluma, Apteranthes, Australluma, Boucerosia, Caudanthera, Desmidorchis and Monolluma. New combinations are proposed in 15 cases; Caralluma adscendens var. geniculata is raised to specific rank. Anomalluma is reinstated, and Pseudolithos mccoyi is transfered to it. A broadened concept for Orbea (incl. Angolluma and Orbeopsis) is recognized, but Orbeanthus is kept separate. The monotypic Ballyanthus, recently separated from Orbea, is nested within Duvalia. Piaranthus (incl. Huerniopsis) is monophyletic.The bitypic Notechidnopsis is reduced to the type species, N. tessellata, while N. columnaris is transferred to a new genus, Richtersveldia.
S676	S. J. Wagstaff;I. Breitwieser	2002	Phylogenetic relationships of New Zealand Asteraceae inferred from ITS sequences	Plant Systematics and Evolution	231	1-4	203-224	10.1007/s006060200020		Asteraceae; New Zealand; molecular systematics; nuclear ribosomal DNA; ITS	Forty-five sequences from members of all genera of Asteraceae indigenous to New Zealand and 50 published sequences representing the tribal diversity in the family were analyzed to assess the utility of ITS sequences to resolve phylogenetic relationships. Previous studies using chloroplast DNA sequences and morphology provided support for several clades in the Asteraceae, yet the relationships among some of these were uncertain. The results from ITS analysis were largely consistent with these earlier studies. The New Zealand species are included in at least six clades, most of these corresponding to recognized tribes. Our results have also clarified the tribal affinities of a few anomalous genera. Haastia, previously aligned with the Gnaphalieae or the Astereae, is nested in the Senecioneae. Centipeda, previously included in the Astereae or Anthemideae, emerges near the Heliantheae. The relationships of Abrotanella remain unresolved. 
S877	N. Pedersen;L. Hedens	2003	Phylogenetic investigations of a well supported clade within the acrocarpous moss family Bryaceae: evidence from seven chloroplast DNA sequences and morphology	Plant Systematics and Evolution							Phylogenetic analyses of a well supported clade within the acrocarpous moss family Bryaceae were performed using information from chloroplast DNA sequences and morphology. Maximum parsimony, maximum likelihood, and Bayesian analyses all support two major clades within the ingroup. The first clade includes members of Bryum sections Apalodictyon, Caespiticia, Capillaria, and Leucodontium, and Plagiobryum zieri, and we suggest that the species of this clade comprise an own genus. The second clade contains representatives from all the included Bryum sections (except Capillaria) plus Acidodontium, Anomobryum, Brachymenium section Dicranobryum, and Haplodontium. Within this clade, Brachymenium section Dicranobryum is closely related to Bryum section Bryum. This suggests that the representatives of section Brachymenium included in this study should be accommodated in Bryum. Finally, the strong support for a clade with B. alpinum and B. coronatum indicate that these taxa should be separated from Bryum at the genus level.
S1292	N. S. Hassan;J. Thiede;S. Liede-Schumann	2005	Phylogenetic analysis of Sesuvioideae (Aizoaceae) inferred from nrDNA internal transcribed spacer (ITS) sequences and morphological data	Plant Systematics and Evolution							The phylogeny of the four genera of Aizoaceae subfamily Sesuvioideae (Sesuvium, Cypselea, Trianthema and Zaleya) is elucidated employing internal transcribed spacer (ITS) sequences and 23 morphological characters. Phylogenetic analysis based on ITS sequences and a combined molecular-morphological analysis provide largely congruent results. The monophyly of Sesuvioideae and its close relationship to Aizooideae s. lat. and Mesembryanthemoideae is confirmed. Zaleya is placed within Trianthema and Cypselea within Sesuvium by ITS analysis, but in the combined analysis, Zaleya forms an unresolved polytomy with the two Trianthema clades and Cypselea forms an unresolved polytomy with the two Sesuvium clades. Sesuvium sesuvioides and S. hydaspicum, previously treated as synonyms, are closely related, but molecular data do not support conspecifity. The Trianthema triquetra complex needs further intensive study because the African T. triquetra sample is closer to the NE African-Arabian T. sheilae than to Australian samples of T. triquetra. The close relationship of four species of Trianthema (T. patellitecta, T. rhynchocalyptra, T. megasperma, and T. pilosa) from Australia based on molecular data is supported morphologically by the exclusive possession of a well-developed indumentum in these taxa.
S1347	C. Neinhuis;S. Wanke;K. W. Hilu;K. Müller;T. Borsch	2005	Phylogeny of Aristolochiaceae based on parsimony, likelihood, and Bayesian analyses of trnL-trnF sequences	Plant Systematics and Evolution	250	1-2	7-26	10.1007/s00606-004-0217-0			Aristolochiaceae, a family of worldwide distribution comprising about 500 species, is a member of Piperales. Although Piperales is clearly monophyletic, the precise relationship within the order is ambiguous due to inconsistent placements of Lactoris fernandeziana. The appearance in some studies of Lactoris within Aristolochiaceae and the incongruence in generic treatments have also raised questions about the infrastructure of the family. This study addresses the overall generic relationships in the Aristolochiaceae and its position in the Piperales based on dense taxon sampling and sequence data from the plastid trnL-F region. The study resolved Piperales consisting of two major clades (Piperaceae plus Saururaceae and Lactoridaceae plus Aristolochiaceae) and Lactoris nested within Aristolochiaceae but with low support. The concept of two subfamilies in Aristolochiaceae, Asaroideae and Aristolochioideae, gains maximum statistical support. A generic treatment of Aristolochiaceae based on trnL-F is proposed which is congruent with recent analyses based on morphological characters.
S1530	E. J. Hermsen;K. C. Nixon;W. L. Crepet	2006	The impact of extinct taxa on understanding the early evolution of angiosperm clades: an example incorporating fossil reproductive structures of Saxifragales	Plant Systematics and Evolution	260		141-169				A cladistic analysis was performed including five Cretaceous and 31 extant taxa within Saxifragales using a combination of molecular sequence and morphological data in order to elucidate the utility of extinct taxa in illuminating saxifragalean evolution. The results suggest that Saxifragales as well as most major infraordinal clades lack unambiguous morphological synapomorphies among the characters examined; that the major linages of Saxifragales were distinct by ca. 90-70 Ma; and that the ca. 90 Ma taxa lack characteristic derived features present in modern taxa. General conclusions concerning the advantages of joint extinct-extant taxon phylogenetic analyses explored herein include: 1) Prediction of the morphological characters present in early members of a clade; 2) Determination of minimum ages for lineage divergences; 3) Resolution of the order in which synapomorphies may have evolved; and 4) Circumscription of the time interval during which synapomorphies may have evolved.
S2330	A. N. Muellner;D. D. Vassiliades;S. S. Renner	2007	Placing Biebersteiniacae, a herbaceous clade of Sapindales, in a temporal and geographic context	Plant Systematics and Evolution	266		233-252	10.1007/s00606-007-0546-x			Biebersteiniaceae comprise a single genus with four species of perennial herbs occurring from central Asia to Greece. A previous molecular phylogenetic study placed one of the species in an isolated position in Sapindales, while morphological studies had placed Biebersteinia in or near Geraniaceae, albeit doubtfully. We tested the monophyly and placement of the family with data from the chloroplast genes rbcL and atpB obtained for all four species, other major clades of Sapindales and outgroups for a total of up to 114 taxa. Parsimony, Bayesian, and likelihood analyses place Biebersteinia in Sapindales, possibly as sister to the other eight families. Strict and relaxed molecular clocks constrained with fossils of Biebersteinia and up to eight other Sapindales suggest that the Biebersteinia crown group diversi&#64257;ed in the Oligocene and Miocene, while the stem lineage dates back to the Late Paleocene. Ages for other sapindalean families are earlier than those obtained in more sparsely sampled analyses, although estimates for Burseraceae agree surprisingly well. Ancestral area analyses suggest that Biebersteinia expanded from the eastern part of its range (i.e. Tibet and Inner Mongolia) to the west, although analyses are hampered by the unclear sister group relationships.
S2022	R. Kurzyna-Młynik;A. A. Oskolski;S. R. Downie;R. Kopacz;A. Wojewódzka;K. Spalik	2008	Phylogenetic position of the genus Ferula (Apiaceae) and its placement in tribe Scandiceae as inferred from nrDNA ITS sequence variation	Plant Systematics and Evolution							Recent molecular systematic investigations suggested that Ferula, an umbellifer genus of about 170 species, is polyphyletic, with its members placed in the apioid superclade and within tribe Scandiceae. We analyzed ITS sequences variation from 134 accessions of Apiaceae, including 83 accessions (74 species) of Ferula to ascertain the phylogenetic position of the genus within the family. Phylogenetic analyses of these data using maximum parsimony, Bayesian, and neighbor-joining methods support the monophyly of Ferula upon the addition of Dorema and Leutea (as Ferula sensu lato) and its placement in tribe Scandiceae. Ferula sensu lato is closely allied with other major lineages of Scandiceae, corresponding to subtribes Scandicinae, Daucinae, and Torilidinae. Therefore, we recognize the Ferula clade as subtribe Ferulinae. Another addition to tribe Scandiceae is a clade composed of genera Glaucosciadium and Mozaffariania. The three accessions of Ferula misplaced in the apioid superclade represent a species of Silaum
S1964	G. Petersen;O. Seberg	2008	Phylogenetic relationships of allotetraploid Hordelymus europaeus (L.) Harz (Poaceae: Triticeae)	Plant Systematics and Evolution							Phylogenetic analyses of sequence data from two plastid genes (rbcL and ndhF) and two single-copy nuclear genes (DMC1 and EF-G) are used to elucidate the origin of the tetraploid, monotypic Hordelymus europaeus. Previous data have mostly shown an allopolyploid origin of Hordelymus, but very recently it was suggested that Hordelymus is autoploid. The present analysis, including representatives from all basic genome types accepted in the Triticeae, lends support to an alloploid origin. There is substantial support for the progenitor of Psathyrostachys as female genome donor of Hordelymus. Individual nuclear gene trees disagree about the male genome donor, but combined analysis of all data weakly supports the common progenitor to Pseudorogneria and Henrardia as the male genome donor.
S1977	U. Wahrmund;T. Rein;K. F. Mueller;M. Groth-Malonek;V. Knoop	2008	Fifty mosses on five trees: Comparing phylogenetic information in three types of non-coding mitochondrial DNA and two chloroplast loci	Plant Systematics and Evolution							Given the frequent genomic recombinations in plant mitochondrial DNA, intergenic regions of this organelle genome had so far not been considered as loci of potential phylogentic information. Based on the recent evidence that an evolutionary ancient mitochondrial nad5-nad4 gene continuum is conserved in bryophytes we have compiled a dataset for a phylogenetically wide sampling of 50 mosses covering this intergenic region. The length of the intergenic region was generally in the range of 585 bp (Diphyscium) to 646 bp (Tomentypnum) with rare exceptions, for example all Polytrichales taxa showing a 200 bp deletion as an apparent synapomorphy of this order. Phylogenetic information in the novel marker sequence was compared with that of a nad5 gene region containing a group I intron and a nad2 gene region containing a group II intron as well as with two widely sampled chloroplast data sets, rbcL and rps4. Indel evolution in the three types of non-coding mitochondrial sequences is obviously more taxon-dependent than locus-dependent, indicating lineage-specific insertion/deletion rates. For example, larger sequence deletions are a general feature in Schistostega and Tetraphis. Although confidence for particular nodes in the phylogeny was found to vary among data sets, gene trees were essentially without conflict with respect to well supported ones and add up in information towards a reasonably well resolved moss phylogeny. However, while a consensus on the latter is clearly emerging, sufficient confidence is still lacking for the first dichotomies among the arthrodontous mosses leading into subclasses Bryidae, Dicranidae and Funariidae and the relative placement of nematodontous mosses (Polytrichales and Tetraphidales) on the backbone of early moss phylogeny.
S1960	A. Menkis;D. J. Jacobson;T. Gustafsson;H. Johannesson	2008	The Mating-type Chromosome in the Filamentous Ascomycete Neurospora tetrasperma Represents a Model for Early Evolution of Sex Chromosomes	Plos Genetics							We combined gene divergence data, classical genetics and phylogenetics to study the evolution of the mating-type chromosome in the filamentous ascomycete Neurospora tetrasperma. In this species, a large non-recombining region of the mating-type chromosome is associated with a unique fungal life cycle where self-fertility is enforced by maintenance of a constant state of heterokaryosis. Sequence divergence between alleles of 35 genes from the two single mating-type component strains (i.e. the homokaryotic mat A or mat a-strains), derived from one N. tetrasperma heterokaryon (mat A + mat a), was analyzed. By this approach we were able to identify the boundaries and size of the non-recombining region, and reveal insight into the history of recombination cessation. The non-recombining region covers almost 7 Mbp, over 75% of the chromosome, and we hypothesize that the evolution of the mating-type chromosome in this lineage involved two successive events. The first event was contemporaneous with the split of N. tetrasperma from a common ancestor with its outcrossing relative N. crassa and suppressed recombination over at least 6.6 Mbp, and the second was confined to a smaller region in which recombination ceased more recently. In spite of the early origin of the first „evolutionary stratum‰, genealogies of five genes from strains belonging to an additional N. tetrasperma lineage indicate independent initiations of suppressed recombination in different phylogenetic lineages. This study highlights the shared features between the sex chromosomes found in the animal and plant kingdoms and the fungal mating-type chromosome, despite fungi having no separate sexes. As is often found in sex chromosomes of plants and animals, recombination suppression of the mating-type chromosome of N. tetrasperma involved more than one evolutionary event, covers the majority of the mating-type chromosome and is flanked by distal regions with obligate crossovers.
S2468	K. Krabbe;F. Leese;C. Mayer;R. Tollrian;C. Held	2010	Cryptic mitochondrial lineages in the widespread pycnogonid Colossendeis megalonyx Hoek, 1881 from Antarctic and Subantarctic waters	Polar Biology	33	3	281-292	10.1007/s00300-009-0703-5			Colossendeis megalonyx Hoek, 1881 is a widespread and abundant pycnogonid in the Southern Ocean which has also been reported from the South Atlantic and South Pacific Oceans. Its strictly benthic lifestyle is expected to promote genetic differentiation among populations and ultimately facilitate speciation. On the other hand, the reported eurybathy and unknown larval stages of this species may allow Colossendeis megalonyx to maintain genetic continuity between isolated shallow-water habitats by active dispersal through the deep sea or by passive rafting on floating objects or host species. Thus it remains unknown whether and to which extent geographically separated populations of Colossendeis megalonyx maintain gene flow in the Southern Ocean. We sampled 96 specimens of Colossendeis megalonyx from three stations in the Atlantic Sector of the Southern Ocean and one station from the South American continental shelf (Burdwood Bank). The genetic structure of nominal Colossendeis megalonyx as well as its phylogenetic position within the genus Colossendeis was assessed using a fragment of the cytochrome c oxidase subunit 1 gene. Our data strongly support that nominal Colossendeis megalonyx consists of at least five cryptic and one pseudocryptic mitochondrial lineages, four of which appear geographically restricted. Two more lineages occurred at locations separated by more than 1000 kilometres in the Antarctic, thus indicating high levels of gene flow or recent colonization. No haplotype sharing across the Polar Frontal Zone was observed. Our results strongly suggest that cryptic speciation occured within the genus Colossendeis. The reported broad biogeographic distribution range of Colossendeis megalonyx and perhaps other Antarctic pycnogonids should therefore be regarded with caution.
S1155	P. L. Sholberg;C. Harlton;P. Haag;C. A. Lévesque;D. T. O. Gorman;K. Seifert	2004	Benzimidazole and diphenylamine sensitivity and identity of Penicillium spp. that cause postharvest blue mold of apples using Beta-tubulin gene sequences	Postharvest Biology and Technology							Blue mold decay is an important disease of stored apples in North America. The disease is caused by species of Penicillium that are difficult to identify with conventional mycological methods. Furthermore, P. expansum, has developed resistance to benzimidazole fungicides and information is needed on the nature of this resistance. Twenty-three of 150 isolates collected from packinghouses were selected for identification and fungicide resistance studies using conventional and molecular techniques. The isolates were grown for one week on Czapek yeast autolysate, malt extract, and 25% glycerol nitrate agars at 5, 25, and 35°C and on potato dextrose agar at 20°C amended with benomyl, thiabendazole, and diphenylamine. The â-tubulin gene sequence (600-700 bp) of the isolates were also examined taking care to include codons 198 and 200 with forward primers Bt-LEV-Up4 and reverse primer Bt-LEV-Lo1. Based on the information provided by the plate studies regarding appearance and growth rate of the isolates it was possible to separate the faster growing Penicillium expansum isolates from the slower growing P. solitum isolates. The DNA sequence data was very helpful when used in conjunction with plate tests and removed any ambiguity when trying to separate these closely related species. The DNA sequence at codon 198 corresponded to benomyl resistance if the GAG sequence had a substitution in it. However, benomyl resistance also occurred with the normal GAG sequence at codon 198 in five of the isolates. P. expansum isolates with a substitution of GAG to GCG or GTG at codon 198 were highly resistant to benomyl and thiabendazole but only the three isolates with the GCG substitution were highly sensitive to diphenylamine. The remaining benomyl resistant isolates were resistant to diphenylamine except one P. solitum isolate that was sensitive.
S2086	E. Tanaka	2008	Molecular phylogenetic analysis of ergot fungi to presume the parasitic characteristics	Proceedings of the association for plant protection of hokuriku	57						To presume the parasitic characteristics of ergot fungi (Claviceps spp.) on crop, molecular phylogenetic analysis approach was applied to refer to previous parasitic tests. Ergot fungi found on Agrostis gigantea, Alopecurus aequalis var. amurensis and Polypogon fugax in Ishikawa prefecture, were morphologically identified as C. purpurea var. alopecuri. Phylogenetic analysis of Claviceps spp. using ITS1-5.8S rDNA-ITS2 region revealed that the C. purpurea was divided into at least two groups. These phylogenetic groups were considered to be populations which have parasitic preference. Consequently, the phylogenetic group including C. purpurea var. alopecuri was regarded as a population that can parasitize to barley and wheat.
S1056	J. A. Schulte Ii;J. V. Vindum;H. Win;T. Thin;K. S. Lwin;A. K. Shein;H. Tun	2004	Phylogenetic Relationships of the Genus Ptyctolaemus (Squamata: Agamidae), with a Description of a New Species from the Chin Hills of Western Myanmar	Proceedings of the California Academy of Sciences	55		222-245				A new species of Ptyctolaemus is described from the Chin Hills, Chin State, western Myanmar. Specimens were found on the slopes of Mount Victoria between elevations of 709 m and 1,940 m in areas of secondary forest in close proximity to human habitation. The new species differs from P. gularis, by having a more developed nuchal crest, shorter limbs, larger and more heterogeneous dorsal body scales, and a shorter tail. P. phuwuanensis can be distinguished from P. gularis and the new species by the presence of femoral pores and a distinct gular region. A molecular phylogenetic analysis of P. gularis, P. phuwuanensis, the new species of Ptyctolaemus from Chin State, and other species in the draconine clade indicates that the P. phuwuanensis is sister to all other draconine agamids and we recommend the recognition of the genus name Mantheyus for P. phuwuanensis in light of these results. Ptyctolaemus from Chin State and P. gularis are related but significantly different genetically and morphologically representing separate species.
S1461	G. R. Zug;H. H. K. Brown;J. A. S. Ii;J. V. Vindum	2006	Systematics of the Garden Lizards, Calotes versicolor group (Reptilia, Squamata, Agamidae), in Myanmar: Central dry zone populations	Proceedings of the California Academy of Sciences							The Burmese garden lizards represent a complex of several species. DNA sequence and morphological analyses reveal that two species occur sympatrically in the central dry zone of Myanmar. These two species are described herein. Additionally, the molecular data demonstrate that Calotes versicolor represents multiple species and at least two clades: an India-Myanmar and a Myanmar-Southeast Asian one. The morphological investigation does not currently recognize unique trait(s) for each clade, but it does establish a set of morphometric, scalation, and quantitative coloration traits that permit statistical comparison of intra- and interpopulational variation in the versicolor species group.
S2x4x96c13c19c03	J. F. Wendel	1989	New World tetraploid cottons contain Old World cytoplasm	Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America	86		4132-4136				New World tetraploid cottons (Gossypium spp.) originated through hybridization of ancestral diploid species that presently have allopatric ranges in Asia-Africa (the A genome) and the New World tropics and subtropics (the D genome). Despite intensive study, the identity of the parental diploids and the antiquity of polyploidization remain unresolved. In this study, variation in the maternally inherited chloroplast genome was assessed among species representing both of the parental genomes and the tetraploids. Approximately S60 restriction sites were assayed in each accession, representing sequence information for about 3200 nucleotides. The resulting maternal phylogeny has no convergent restriction site mutations and demonstrates that the cytoplasm donor for all tetraploid species was an A genome diploid with a chloroplast genome that is similar to Gossypium arboreum and Gossypium herbaceum. No mutational differences were detected between these two species, and few mutations distinguish the chloroplast genomes of A genome diploids from those of tetraploid taxa. In contrast to expectations based on extensive taxonomic, geographic, and genetic diversity, a surprisingly low level of sequence divergence has accumulated subsequent to polyploidization. Chloroplast genomes of tetraploid species are distinguished from each other by between one and six apparent point mutations. The data suggest that tetraploid cotton originated relatively recently, perhaps within the last 1-2 million years, with subsequent rapid evolution and diversification throughout the New World tropics.
S2x2x96c15c36c57	T. R. Ioerger;A. G. Clark;T. H. Kao	1990	Polymorphism at the self-incompatitbility locus in Solanaceae predates speciation	Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America	87		9732-9735				Sequences of 11 alleles of the gametophytic self-incompatibility locus (S locus) from three species of the Solanaceae family have recently been determined. Pairwise comparisons of these alleles reveal two unexpected observations: (i) amino acid sequence similarity can be as low as 40% within species and (ii) some interspecific similarities are higher than intraspecific similarities. The gene genealogy clearly illustrates this unusual pattern of relationships. The data suggest that some of the polymorphism at the S locus existed prior to the divergence of these species and has been maintained to the present. In support of this hypothesis, the number of shared polymorphic sites was found to exceed the number found in simulations with independent accumulation of mutations. Strictly neutral evolution is exceedingly unlikely to maintain the polymorphism for such a long time. The allele multiplicity and extreme age of the alleles is consistent with Wright's classic one-locus population genetic model of gametophytic self-incompatibility. Similarities between the plant S locus and the mammalian major histocompatibility complex are discussed.
S2x4x96c13c24c02	A. T. Whittemore;B. A. Schaal	1991	Interspecific gene flow in sympatric oaks	Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America	88		2540-2544				Variation of chloroplast DNA and nuclear ribosomal DNA (DNA encoding ribosomal RNA) was studied for five species of white oak native to the eastern United States. Although these species differ in many morphological characters and have different (though overlapping) geographical ranges and ecological tolerances they are interfertile and often grow in mixed stands and hybrids are occasionally found in nature. All individuals studied were morphologically typical members of their respective species—i.e. showed no evidence of recent hybrid ancestry. Restriction site markers in the chloroplast DNA reveal several clear cases of localized gene exchange between species showing that there is appreciable gene flow between sympatric species in this group. One length variant of the nuclear ribosomal DNA however is species specific. The sharp morphological and ecological differences between the species together with the one ribosomal DNA variant suggest that nuclear genes may be exchanged less freely between species than are chloroplast genotypes.
S3x23x98c14c26c35	S. A. Cameron	1993	Multiple origins of advanced eusociality in bees inferred from mitochondrial DNA sequences	Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America	90		8687-8691				The remarkably high level...
S2x7x96c15c42c12	M. R. Duvall;G. H. J. Learn;L. E. Eguiarte;M. T. Clegg	1993	Phylogenetic analysis of rbcL sequences identifies Acorus calamus as the primal extant monocotyledon	Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America	90		4641-4644				The identity of the oldest lineage of monocotyledons is a subject of debate. Alternative interpretations of morphological homologies are variously consistent with proposals that species of Alismatanae, Dioscoreales, or Melanthiales were the earliest descendants of the first monocotyledons. We present phylogenetic analyses based on DNA sequences of the plastid locus rbcL in which Acurs calamus, an herb with unspecialized floral features and of uncertain affinities, is supported as a member of the oldest extant lineage of monocotyledons. This conclusion is consistent with a substantial body of morphological, anatomical, and embyrological evidence and offers an explanation for the failure to identify any close relationship between Acorus and other genera.
S4x18x97c17c13c40	R. G. Gillespie;H. B. Croom;S. R. Palumbi	1994	Multiple origins of a spider radiation in Hawaii	Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America	91	6	2290-2294				The Hawaiian Islands are renowned for some of the most spectacular species radiations in the world. Most of these radiations have been attributed to single colonization events, although the evidence supporting monophyletic origins is often poorly resolved and/or ambiguous. Without a concrete understanding of the origins of species radiations, it is impossible to understand the phylogenetic pattern of species proliferation or the spectrum of morphological, ecological, and behavioral modifications attributable to a single colonist. In this study we examined the species radiation of the spider genus Tetragnatha in Hawaii. Unlike their mainland congeners, the Hawaiian Tetragnatha are extremely diverse in morphology, ecology, and behavior. We tested whether this diversity arose from a single or multiple colonization events. We coupled morphological (37 characters) and molecular (sequence from the 12S ribosomal subunit of mitochondrial DNA) approaches to assess the phylogenetic position of the Hawaiian Tetragnatha relative to continental congeners and to examine evidence for monophyly. We provide evidence that the Hawaiian Tetragnatha emanate from multiple origins. At least two independent species radiations, the spiny-leg clade and the web-building species Tetragnatha stelarobusta and Tetragnatha acuta, have arisen from one or more founder events. Two additional natural colonizations have resulted in the establishment of non-speciose lineages, as represented by Tetragnatha hawaiensis and Doryonychus raptor.
S304	S. M. Barns;C. F. Delwiche;J. D. Palmer;N. R. Pace	1996	Perspectives on archaeal diversity, thermophily and monophyly from environmental rRNA sequences	Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America	93	17	9188-9193		http://www.pnas.org/content/93/17/9188.abstract		Phylogenetic analysis of ribosomal RNA sequences obtained from uncultivated organisms of a hot spring in Yellowstone National Park reveals several novel groups of Archaea, many of which diverged from the crenarchaeal line of descent prior to previously characterized members of that kingdom. Universal phylogenetic trees constructed with the addition of these sequences indicate monophyly of Archaea, with modest bootstrap support. The data also show a specific relationship between low-temperature marine Archaea and some hot spring Archaea. Two of the environmental sequences are enigmatic: depending upon the dataset and analytical method used, these sequences branch deeply within the Crenarchaeota, below the bifurcation between Crenarchaeota and Euryarchaeota, or as the sister group to eukarya. If additional data confirm either of the latter two placements, then the organisms represented by these ribosomal RNA sequences would merit recognition as a new kingdom.
S375	P. L. M. Lee;D. H. Clayton;R. Griffiths;R. D. M. Page	1996	Does behaviour reflect phylogeny in swiftlets (Aves: Apodidae)? A test using cytochrome b mitochondrial DNA sequences	Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America	93	14	7091-7096		http://www.pnas.org/content/93/14/7091.abstract		Swiftlets are small insectivorous birds, many of which nest in caves and are known to echolocate. Due to a lack of distinguishing morphological characters, the taxonomy of swiftlets is primarily based on the presence or absence of echolocating ability, together with nest characters. To test the reliability of these behavioral characters, we constructed an independent phylogeny using cytochrome b mitochondrial DNA sequences from swiftlets and their relatives. This phylogeny is broadly consistent with the higher classification of swifts but does not support the monophyly of swiftlets. Echolocating swiftlets (Aerodramus) and the nonecholocating giant swiftlet (Hydrochous gigas) group together, but the remaining nonecholocating swiftlets belonging to Collocalia are not sister taxa to these swiftlets. While echolocation may be a synapomorphy of Aerodramus (perhaps secondarily lost in Hydrochous), no character of Aerodramus nests showed a statistically significant fit to the molecular phylogeny, indicating that nest characters are not phylogenetically reliable in this group.
S425	C. W. dePamphilis;N. D. Young;A. D. Wolfe	1997	Evolution of plastid gene rps2 in a lineage of hemiparasitic and holoparasitic plants: Many losses of photosynthesis and complex patterns of rate variation	Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America	94	14	7367-7372		http://www.pnas.org/content/94/14/7367.abstract	molecular evolution; relative rates test; rbcL pseudogene; parallel bootstrap	The plastid genomes of some nonphotosyn-thetic parasitic plants have experienced an extreme reduction in gene content and an increase in evolutionary rate of remaining genes. Nothing is known of the dynamics of these events or whether either is a direct outcome of the loss of photosynthesis. The parasitic Scrophulariaceae and Oroban-chaceae, representing a continuum of heterotrophic ability ranging from photosynthetic hemiparasites to nonphotosyn-thetic holoparasites, are used to investigate these issues. We present a phylogenetic hypothesis for parasitic Scrophulari-aceae and Orobanchaceae based on sequences of the plastid gene rps2, encoding the S2 subunit of the plastid ribosome. Parasitic Scrophulariaceae and Orobanchaceae form a mono-phyletic group in which parasitism can be inferred to have evolved once. Holoparasitism has evolved independently at least five times, with certain holoparasitic lineages represent-ing single species, genera, and collections of nonphotosyn-thetic genera. Evolutionary loss of the photosynthetic gene rbcL is limited to a subset of holoparasitic lineages, with several holoparasites retaining a full length rbcL sequence. In contrast, the translational gene rps2 is retained in all plants investigated but has experienced rate accelerations in several hemi- as well as holoparasitic lineages, suggesting that there may be substantial molecular evolutionary changes to the plastid genome of parasites before the loss of photosynthesis. Independent patterns of synonymous and nonsynonymous rate acceleration in rps2 point to distinct mechanisms under-lying rate variation in different lineages. Parasitic Scrophu-lariaceae (including the traditional Orobanchaceae) provide a rich platform for the investigation of molecular evolutionary process, gene function, and the evolution of parasitism.
S9x26x97c18c14c01	D. S. Hibbett;E. M. Pine;E. Langer;G. Langer;M. J. Donoghue	1997	Evolution of gilled mushrooms and puffballs inferred from ribosomal DNA sequences	Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America	94	22	12002-12006 		http://www.pnas.org/content/94/22/12002.abstract		Homobasidiomycete fungi display many complex fruiting body morphologies, including mushrooms and puffballs, but their anatomical simplicity has confounded efforts to understand the evolution of these forms. We performed the first comprehensive phylogenetic analysis of homobasidiomycetes, using sequences from nuclear and mitochondrial ribosomal DNA, with an emphasis on understanding evolutionary relationships of gilled mushrooms and puffballs. Parsimony-based optimization of character states on our phylogenetic trees suggest that strikingly similar gilled mushrooms evolved at least six times, from morphologically diverse precursors. Approximately 87% of gilled mushrooms are in a single lineage, which we call the euagarics. Recently discovered 90 million-year-old fossil mushrooms are probably euagarics, suggesting that (i) the origin of this clade must have occurred no later than the mid-Cretaceous, and (ii) the gilled mushroom morphology has been maintained in certain lineages for tens of millions of years. Puffballs and other forms with enclosed spore-bearing structures (Gasteromycetes) evolved at least four times. Derivation of Gasteromycetes from forms with exposed spore-bearing structures (Hymenomycetes) is correlated with repeated loss of forcible spore discharge (ballistospory). Diverse fruiting body forms and spore dispersal mechanisms have evolved among Gasteromycetes. Nevertheless, it appears that Hymenomycetes have never been secondarily derived from Gasteromycetes, which suggests that the loss of ballistospory has constrained evolution in these lineages.
S284	D. McHugh	1997	Molecular evidence that echiurans and pogonophorans are derived annelids	Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America	94	15	8006-8009		http://www.pnas.org/content/94/15/8006.abstract		The Annelida, which incl,udes the polychaetes and the clitellates, has long held the taxonomic rank of phylum. The unsegmented, mud-dwelling echiuran spoon worms and the gutless, deep-sea pogonophoran tube worms (including vestimentiferans) share several embryological and morphological features with annelids, but each group also has been considered as a separate metazoan phylum based on the unique characters each group displays. Phylogenetic analyses of DNA sequencdes from the nuclear gene elongation fatctor-1a place echiurans and pogonophorans within the Annelida. This result, indicating the derived loss of segmentation in echiurnas, has profound implications for our understanding of the evolution of metazoan body plans and challenges the traditional view of the phylum-level diversity and evolutionary relationships of protosome worms.
S427	M. J. Stanhope;V. G. Waddell;O. Madsen;W. de Jong;S. B. Hedges;G. C. Cleven;D. Kao;M. S. Springer	1998	Molecular evidence for multiple origins of Insectivora and for a new order of endemic African insectivore mammals	Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America	95	17	9967-9972		http://www.pnas.org/content/95/17/9967.abstract		The traditional views regarding the mammalian order Insectivora are that the group descended froma single common ancestor and that it is comprised of the following families: Soricidae (shrews), Tenrecidae (tenrecs), Solenodonti-dae (solenodons), Talpidae (moles), Erinaceidae (hedgehogs and gymnures), and Chrysochloridae (golden moles). Here we present a molecular analysis that includes representatives of all six families of insectivores, as well as 37 other taxa representing marsupials, monotremes, and all but two orders of placental mammals. These data come from complete sequences of the mitochondrial 12S rRNA, tRNA-Valine, and 16S rRNA genes (2.6 kb). A wide range of different methods of phylogenetic analysis groups the tenrecs and golden moles (both endemic to Africa) in an all-African superordinal clade comprised of elephants, sire-nians, hyracoids, aardvark, and elephant shrews, to the exclusion of the other four remaining families of insectivores. Statistical analyses reject the idea of a monophyletic Insectivora as well as traditional concepts of the insectivore suborder Soricomorpha. These findings are supported by sequence analyses of several nuclear genes presented here: vWF, A2AB, and a- bhemoglobin. These results require that the order Insectivora be partitioned and that the two African families (golden moles and tenrecs) be placed in a new order. The African superordinal clade now includes six orders of placental mammals.
S505	E. E. Harris;J. Hey	1999	X Chromosome evidence for ancient human histories	Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America	96	6	3320-3324		http://www.pnas.org/content/96/6/3320.abstract		Diverse African and non-African samples of the X-linked PDHA1 (pyruvate dehydrogenase E1 asubunit) locus revealed a fixed DNA sequence difference between the two sample groups. The age of onset of population subdivision appears to be about 200 thousand years ago. This predates the earliest modern human fossils, suggesting the transformation to modern humans occurred in a subdivided population. The base of the PDHA1 gene tree is relatively ancient, with an estimated age of 1.86 million years, a late Pliocene time associated with early species of Homo. PDHA1 revealed very low variation among non-Africans, but in other respects the data are consistent with reports from other X-linked and autosomal haplotype data sets. Like these other genes, but in conflict with microsatellite and mitochondrial data, PDHA1 does not show evidence of human population expansion.
S510	O. Pellmyr;J. Leebens-Mack	1999	Forty million years of mutualism: evidence for Eocene origin of the yucca - yucca moth association	Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America	96	16	9178-9183		http://www.pnas.org/content/96/16/9178.full		The obligate mutualism between yuccas and yucca moths is a major model system for the study of coevolving species interactions. Exploration of the processes that have generated current diversity and associations within this mutualism requires robust phylogenies and timelines for both the moths and the yuccas. Here we establish a molecular clock for the moths based on mtDNA, and use it to estimate the time of major life history events within the yucca moths. Colonization of yuccas had occurred 41.5±9.8 Mya, with rapid life habit diversification and the emergence of pollinators within 0-6 My after yucca colonization. A subsequent burst of diversification 3.2±1.8 Mya coincided with evolution of arid habitats in western North America. Derived non-pollinating cheater yucca moths evolved 1.26 ± 0.96 Mya. The estimated age of the moths far predates the host fossil record, but is consistent with suggested host age based on paleobotanical, climatological, biogeographical, and geological data, and a tentative estimation from an rbcL-based molecular clock. The moth data are used to establish three alternative scenarios of how the moths and plants have coevolved. They yield specific predictions that can be tested once a robust plant phylogeny becomes available.
S981	T. J. Barkman;S. H. Lim;K. Mat Salleh;J. Nais	2004	Mitochondrial DNA sequences reveal the photosynthetic relatives of Rafflesia, the world's largest flower	Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America	101		787-792				All parasites are thought to have evolved from free-living ancestors. However, the ancestral conditions facilitating the shift to parasitism are unclear, particularly in plants because the phylogenetic position of many parasites is unknown. This is especially true for Rafflesia, an endophytic holoparasite that produces the largest flowers in the world and which has defied confident phylogenetic placement since its discovery more than 180 years ago. Here we present results of a phylogenetic analysis of 95 species of seed plants designed to infer the position of Rafflesia in an evolutionary context using the mitochondrial gene matR (1,806 aligned base pairs). Overall the estimated phylogenetic tree is highly congruent with independent analyses and provides a strongly supported placement of Rafflesia with the order Malpighiales, which includes poinsettias, violets and passionflowers. Furthermore, the phylogenetic placement of Mitrastema, another enigmatic, holoparasitic angiosperm within the order Ericales (which includes blueberries and persimmons) was also obtained with these data. Although traditionally classified together, Rafflesia and Mitrastema are only distantly related, implying their extreme parasitic habit is the result of convergent evolution. Our results indicate that the previous significant difficulties associated with phylogenetic placement of holoparasitic plants may be overcome using mitochondrial DNA so that a broader understanding of the origins and evolution of parasitism may emerge.
S1342	T. A. K. Freitas;S. Hou;E. M. Dioum;J. A. Salto;J. Newhouse;G. Gonzalez;M. A. Gilles-Gonzalez;M. Alam	2004	Ancestral hemoglobins in Archaea	Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America	101	17	6675-6680				Hemoglobins are ubiquitous in Eukarya and Bacteria but, until now, have not been found in Archaea. A phylogenetic analysis of the recently revealed microbial family of globin-coupled hemebased sensors suggests that these sensors descended from an ancient globin-only progenitor, or a protoglobin (Pgb). Here, we report the discovery and characterization of two Pgbs from the Archaea: ApPgb from the obligately aerobic hyperthermophile Aeropyrum pernix, and MaPgb from the strictly anaerobic methanogen Methanosarcina acetivorans. Both ApPgb and MaPgb bind molecular oxygen, nitric oxide, and carbon monoxide by means of a heme moiety that is coordinated to the protein through the F8 histidine (histidine 120). We postulate that these archaeal globins are the ancestors of contemporary hemoglobins. keywords: globin-coupled sensor
S1094	K. Kiontke;N. P. Gavin;Y. Raynes;C. Roehrig;F. Piano;D. H. A. Fitch	2004	Caenorhabditis phylogeny predicts convergence of hermaphroditism and extensive intron loss	Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America							Despite the prominence of Caenorhabditis elegans as a major developmental and genetic model system, its phylogenetic relationship to its closest relatives has not been resolved. Resolution of these relationships is necessary for studying the steps that underlie life history, genomic, and morphological evolution of this important system. Using data from five different nuclear genes from 10 Caenorhabditis species currently in culture, we find a well-resolved phylogeny that reveals three striking patterns in the evolution of this animal group: (1) hermaphroditism has evolved independently in C. elegans and its close relative C. briggsae; (2) there is a large degree of intron turnover within Caenorhabditis and intron losses are much more frequent than intron gains; and (3) despite the lack of marked morphological diversity, more genetic disparity is present within this one genus than has occurred within all vertebrates.
S1139	R. L. Mueller;J. R. Macey;M. Jaekel;D. B. Wake;J. L. Boore	2004	Morphological homoplasy, life history evolution, and historical biogeography of plethodontid salamanders inferred from complete mitochondrial genomes	Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America	101	38	13820-13825	10.1073/pnas.0405785101			The evolutionary history of the largest salamander family (Plethodontidae) is characterized by extreme morphological homoplasy. Analysis of the mechanisms generating such homoplasy requires an independent, molecular phylogeny. To this end, we sequenced 24 complete mitochondrial genomes (22 plethodontids and two outgroup taxa), added data for three species from GenBank, and performed partitioned and unpartitioned Bayesian, ML, and MP phylogenetic analyses. We explored four dataset partitioning strategies to account for evolutionary process heterogeneity among genes and codon positions, all of which yielded increased model likelihoods and decreased numbers of supported nodes in the topologies (PP > 0.95) relative to the unpartitioned analysis. Our phylogenetic analyses yielded congruent trees that contrast with the traditional morphology-based taxonomy; the monophyly of three out of four major groups is rejected. Reanalysis of current hypotheses in light of these new evolutionary relationships suggests that 1) a larval life history stage re-evolved from a direct-developing ancestor multiple times, 2) there is no phylogenetic support for the „Out of Appalachia‰ hypothesis of plethodontid origins, and 3) novel scenarios must be reconstructed for the convergent evolution of projectile tongues, reduction in toe number, and specialization for defensive tail loss. Some of these novel scenarios imply morphological transformation series that proceed in the opposite direction than was previously thought. In addition, they suggest surprising evolutionary lability in traits previously interpreted to be conservative.
S1313	P. Inderbitzin;J. Harkness;B. G. Turgeon;M. L. Berbee	2005	Lateral transfer of mating system in Stemphylium	Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America							The fungal genus Stemphylium (Ascomycota) contains selfing species that evolved from outcrossing ancestors. To find out how selfing originated, we analyzed the Stemphylium MAT loci that regulate sexual reproduction in ascomycetes, and compared MAT structures and phylogeny with a multigene Stemphylium species phylogeny. We found that some Stemphylium species‚ MAT loci contained a single gene, either MAT1-1 or MAT1-2, while others contained a unique fusion of the MAT1-1 and MAT1-2 regions. In all fused MAT regions, MAT1-1 was inverted and joined to a forward oriented MAT1-2 region. As in the closely related Cochliobolus, Stemphylium species with fused MAT regions were able to self. Structural and phylogenetic analyses of the MAT loci showed that the selfing-conferring fused MAT regions were monophyletic with strong support. However, in an organismal phylogeny of Stemphylium species based on 106 isolates and four loci unrelated to mating, selfing arose in two clades, each time with strong support. Isolates with identical fused MAT regions were present in both clades. We showed that a one-time origin of the fused MAT loci followed by a horizontal transfer across lineages was compatible with the data. Another group of selfers in Stemphylium only had forward oriented MAT1-1 at their MAT loci, constituting an additional and third origin of selfing in Stemphylium.
S1637	S. G. Brady;T. R. Schultz;B. L. Fisher;P. S. Ward	2006	Evaluating alternative hypotheses for the early evolution and diversification of ants	Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America	103		18172-18177	10.1073/pnas.0605858103			Ants are the world‚s most diverse and ecologically dominant eusocial organisms. Resolving the phylogeny and timescale for major ant lineages is vital to understanding how they achieved this success. Morphological, molecular, and paleontological studies, however, have presented conflicting views on early ant evolution. To address these issues, we generated the largest ant molecular phylogenetic data set published to date, containing ~6 kb of DNA sequence from 162 species representing all 20 ant subfamilies and 10 aculeate outgroup families. When these data are analyzed with and without outgroups, which are all distantly related to ants and hence long-branched, we obtain conflicting ingroup topologies for some early ant lineages. This result casts strong doubt on the existence of a poneroid clade as currently defined. We compare alternate attachments of the outgroups to the ingroup tree using likelihood tests, and find that several alternative rootings cannot be rejected by the data. These alternatives imply fundamentally different scenarios for the early evolution of ant morphology and behavior. Our data strongly support several novel relationships within the more derived formicoid ants, including placement of the enigmatic subfamily Aenictogitoninae as sister to Dorylus driver ants. We use the molecular data to estimate divergence times, employing a strategy distinct from previous work by incorporating the extensive fossil record of other aculeate Hymenoptera as well as that of ants. Our age estimates for the most recent common ancestor of extant ants range from approximately 115 to 135 million years ago, indicating that a Jurassic origin is highly unlikely.
S1599	B. N. Danforth;S. Sipes;J. Fang;S. G. Brady	2006	The history of early bee diversification based on five genes plus morphology	Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America							Bees, the largest (> 16,000 species) and most important radiation of pollinating insects, originated in early to mid-Cretaceous roughly in synchrony with the angiosperms (flowering plants). Understanding the diversification of the bees and the co-evolutionary history of bees and angiosperms requires a well-supported phylogeny of the bees (as well as the angiosperms). We reconstructed a robust phylogeny of the bees at the family and subfamily level using a data set of five genes (4299 nucleotide sites) plus morphology (109 characters). The molecular data set included protein-coding (elongation factor-1?, RNA polymerase II, LW rhodopsin) as well as ribosomal (28S and 18S) nuclear gene data. Analyses of both the DNA data set and the DNA+morphology data set by parsimony and Bayesian methods yielded a single, well-supported family-level tree topology that places „Melittidae‰ as a paraphyletic group at the base of the phylogeny of bees. This topology („Melittidae-LT basal‰) is significantly better than a previously proposed alternative topology („Colletidae basal‰) based both on likelihood and Bayesian methods. Our results have important implications for understanding the early diversification, historical biogeography, host-plant evolution, and fossil record of bees. The earliest branches of bee phylogeny include lineages that are predominantly host-plant specialists, suggesting that host plant specificity is an ancestral trait in bees. Our results suggest an African origin for bees because the earliest branches of the tree include predominantly African lineages. These results also help explain the predominance of „Melittidae‰, Apidae, and Megachilidae among the earliest fossil bees.
S1630	Y. L. Qiu;L. Li;B. Wang;Z. Chen;V. Knoop;M. Groth-Malonek;O. Dombrovska;J. Lee;L. Kent;J. Rest;G. F. Estabrook;T. A. Hendry;D. W. Taylor;C. M. Testa;M. Ambros;B. Crandall-Stotler;R. J. Duff;M. Stech;W. Frey;D. Quandt;C. C. Davis	2006	The deepest divergences in land plants inferred from phylogenomic evidence	Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America							
S1762	Y. Yang;E. C. Yang;Z. Q. An;X. Z. Liu	2007	Evolution of nematode-trapping cells of predatory fungi of the Orbiliaceae (Ascomycotina): evidence from rDNA and multiprotein sequences	Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America							Among fungi, the basic life strategies are saprophytism, parasitism, and predation. Fungi in Orbiliaceae (Ascomycota) prey on animals by means of specialized trapping structures. Five types of trapping devices are recognized, but their evolutionary origins and divergence are not well understood. Based on comprehensive phylogenetic analysis of nucleotide sequences of three protein-coding genes (RNA polymerase II subunit gene, rpb2; elongation factor 1-alpha gene, ef1-alpha; and alpha tubulin gene, bt) and rDNA in the ITS region, we have demonstrated that the initial trapping structure evolved along two lineages yielding two distinct trapping mechanisms: one developed into constricting rings and the other developed into adhesive traps. Among adhesive trapping devices, the adhesive network separated from the others early and evolved at a steady and gentle speed. The adhesive knob evolved through stalk elongation, with a final development of non-constricting rings. Our data suggest that the derived adhesive traps are at a highly differentiated stage. The development of trapping devices is felicitous proof of adaptive evolution.
S2138	J. Harshman;E. L. Braun;M. J. Braun;C. J. Huddleston;R. C. K. Bowie;J. L. Chojnowski;S. J. Hackett;K. L. Han;R. T. Kimball;B. D. Marks;K. J. Miglia;W. S. Moore;S. Reddy;F. H. Sheldon;D. W. Steadman;S. J. Steppan;C. C. Witt;T. Yuri	2008	Phylogenomic evidence for multiple losses of flight in ratite birds	Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America							Ratites (ostriches, emus, rheas, cassowaries, and kiwis) are large, flightless birds that have long fascinated biologists. Their current distribution on isolated southern land masses is believed to reflect the breakup of the paleocontinent of Gondwana. The prevailing view is that ratites are monophyletic, with the flighted tinamous as their sister group, suggesting a single loss of flight in the common ancestry of ratites. However, phylogenetic analyses of 20 unlinked nuclear genes reveal a genome-wide signal that unequivocally places tinamous within ratites, making ratites polyphyletic and suggesting multiple losses of flight. Phenomena that can mislead phylogenetic analyses, including long branch attraction, base compositional bias, discordance between gene trees and species trees, and sequence alignment errors, have been eliminated as explanations for this result. The most plausible hypothesis requires at least three losses of flight and explains the many morphological and behavioral similarities among ratites by parallel or convergent evolution. Finally, this phylogeny demands fundamental reconsideration of proposals that relate ratite evolution to continental drift.
S1990	R. Lahaye;M. v d Bank;D. Bogarin;J. Warner;F. Pupulin;G. Gigot;O. Maurin;S. Duthoit;T. Barraclough;V. Savolainen	2008	DNA Barcoding the Floras of Biodiversity Hotspots	Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America				10.1073/pnas.0709936105			DNA barcoding is a technique in which species identification is performed by using DNA sequences from a small fragment of the genome, with the aim of contributing to a wide range of ecological and conservation studies in which traditional taxonomic identification is not practical. DNA barcoding is well established in animals, but there is not yet any universally accepted barcode for plants. Here, we undertook intensive field collections in two biodiversity hotspots (Mesoamerica and southern Africa). Using >1,600 samples, we compared eight potential barcodes. Going beyond previous plant studies, we assessed to which extent a ŒŒDNA barcoding gap‚‚ is present between intra- and interspecific variations, using multiple accessions per species. Given its adequate rate of variation, easy amplification and alignment, we identified a portion of the plastid matK gene as a universal DNA barcode for flowering plants. Critically, we further demonstrate the applicability of DNA barcoding for biodiversity inventories. In addition, analyzing >1,000 species of Mesoamerican orchids, DNA barcoding with matK alone reveals cryptic species and proves useful in identifying species listed in Convention on International Trade of Endangered Species (CITES) appendixes.
S2208	C. G. Willis;B. Ruhfel;B. R. Primack;A. J. Miller-Rushing;C. C. Davis	2008	Phylogenetic patterns of species loss in Thoreau's woods are driven by climate change	Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America	105		17029-17033				Climate change has led to major changes in the phenology (the timing of seasonal activities, such as flowering) of some species but not others. The extent to which flowering-time response to temperature is shared among closely related species might have important consequences for community-wide patterns of species loss under rapid climate change. Henry David Thoreau initiated a dataset of the Concord, Massachusetts, flora that spans ~150 years and provides information on changes in species abundance and flowering time. When these data are analyzed in a phylogenetic context, they indicate that change in abundance is strongly correlated with flowering-time response. Species that do not respond to temperature have decreased greatly in abundance, and include among others anemones and buttercups [Ranunculaceae pro parte (p.p.)], asters and campanulas (Asterales), bluets (Rubiaceae p.p.), bladderworts (Lentibulariaceae), dogwoods (Cornaceae), lilies (Liliales), mints (Lamiaceae p.p.), orchids (Orchidaceae), roses (Rosaceae p.p.), saxifrages (Saxifragales), and violets (Malpighiales). Because flowering-time response traits are shared among closely related species, our findings suggest that climate change has affected and will likely continue to shape the phylogenetically biased pattern of species loss in Thoreau‚s woods.
S2494	M. J. Phillips;T. H. Bennett;M. S. Y. Lee	2009	Molecules, morphology and ecology indicate a recent, amphibious ancestry for echidnas	Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America	106	40	17089-17094	10.1073/pnas.0904649106			The semi-aquatic platypus and terrestrial echidnas (spiny anteaters) are the only living egg-laying mammals (monotremes). The fossil record has provided few clues to their origins and the evolution of their ecological specializations. However, recent reassignment of the Early Cretaceous Teinolophos and Steropodon to the platypus lineage implies that platypuses and echidnas diverged >112.5 million years ago, reinforcing the notion of monotremes as living fossils. This placement is based primarily on characters related to a single feature, the enlarged mandibular canal, which supplies blood vessels and dense electrosensory receptors to the platypus bill. Our re-evaluation of the morphological data instead groups platypus and echidnas to the exclusion of Teinolophos and Steropodon, and suggests an enlarged mandibular canal is ancestral for monotremes (partly reversed in echidnas in association with general mandibular reduction). A multi-gene evaluation of the echidna/platypus divergence using both a relaxed molecular clock and direct fossil calibrations reveals a recent split of 19-48 million years ago. Platypus-like monotremes (Monotrematum) pre-date this divergence, indicating that echidnas had aquatically foraging ancestors that reinvaded terrestrial ecosystems. This ecological shift and the associated radiation of echidnas represent a recent expansion of niche-space despite potential competition from marsupials. Monotremes might have survived the invasion of marsupials into Australasia by exploiting ecological niches in which marsupials are restricted by their reproductive mode. Morphology, ecology and molecular biology together indicate that Teinolophos and Steropodon are basal monotremes rather than platypus relatives, and that living monotremes are a relatively recent radiation.
S2405	I. S. Pearse;A. L. Hipp	2009	Phylogenetic and trait similarity to a native species predict herbivory on non-native oaks	Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America	106	43	18097-18102	10.1073/pnas.0904867106			Introduced plants tend to experience less herbivory than natives, although herbivore loads vary widely. Herbivores may switch hosts onto an introduced plant for at least two reasons. They may recognize the novel plant as a potential host based on similarity of the plant s traits to the traits of one of its native hosts, a similarity that may or may not be phylogenetically conserved. Alternately, herbivores may feed optimally, assessing which introduced plants provide the best nutrition irrespective of similarity to native species. Here we created a phylogeny of 57 oak (Quercus) taxa, which were grown outside of their ranges in a common garden that contained one abundant native oak (Q. lobata). We utilized the phylogeny to estimate the phylogenetic conservatism of herbivory by two feeding guilds of insects leaf chewers and leaf miners as well as 11 plant traits expected to affect herbivore performance. We found high phylogenetic conservatism in chewing damage but not mining damage and all traits except for leaf maturation time. Introduced oaks that are more closely related to the native oak received more chewing and mining damage than distantly related oaks, and introduced oaks that had greater overall similarity in leaf traits also received higher chewing damage but not mining damage. These results demonstrate that interactions between introduced plants and their herbivores are driven independently by traits that track plant phylogeny and by leaf traits that likely affect herbivore performance.
S2334	A. Antonelli;J. A. A. Nylander;C. Persson;I. Sanmartín	2009	Tracing the impact of the Andean uplift on Neotropical plant evolution	Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America	106		18627-18632	10.1073/pnas.0811421106			Recent phylogenetic studies have revealed the major role played by the uplift of the Andes in the extraordinary diversification of the Neotropical flora. These studies, however, have typically considered the Andean uplift as a single, time-limited event fostering the evolution of highland elements. This contrasts with geological reconstructions indicating that the uplift occurred in discrete periods from west to east, and that it affected different regions at different times. Here, we provide a new approach for integrating Andean tectonics with biogeographic reconstructions of Neotropical plants, using the coffee family (Rubiaceae) as a model group. The distribution of this family spans highland and montane habitats as well as tropical lowlands of Central and South America, thus offering a unique opportunity to study the influence of the Andean uplift on the entire Neotropical flora. Our results suggest that the Rubiaceae originated in the Paleotropics and used the boreotropical connection to reach South America. The biogeographic patterns found corroborate the existence of a long-lasting dispersal barrier between the Northern and Central Andes, the 'Western Andean Portal'. The uplift of the Eastern Cordillera ended this barrier, allowing dispersal of boreotropical lineages to the South, but gave rise to a huge wetland system ('Lake Pebas') in western Amazonia that prevented in situ speciation and floristic dispersal between the Andes and Amazonia for at least 6 million years. This is the first time these events are documented in plants.
S428	B. L. Cohen;A. J. Baker;K. Blechschmidt;D. L. Dittmann;R. W. Furness;J. A. Gerwin;A. J. Helbig;J. De Korte;H. D. Marshall;R. L. Palma;H. U. Peter;R. Ramli;I. Siebold;M. S. Willcox;R. H. Wilson;R. M. Zink	1997	Enigmatic phylogeny of skuas (Aves: Stercorariidae)	Proceedings of the Royal Society B	264	1379	181-190				Multiple sources of evidence show that the skuas (Aves: Stercorariidae) are a monophyletic group, closely related to gulls (Laridae). On morphological and behavioural evidence the Stercorariidae are divided into two widely divergent genera, Catharacta and Stercorarius, consistent with observed levels of nuclear and mitochondrial gene divergence. Catharacta skuas are large-bodied and with one exception breed in the Southern Hemisphere. Stercorarius skuas (otherwise known as jaegers) are smaller bodied and breed exclusively in the Northern Hemisphere. Evidence from both mitochondrial and nuclear genomes and from ectoparasitic lice (Insecta: Phthiraptera) shows that the Pomarine skua, S. pomarinus, which has been recognized as being somewhat intermediate in certain morphological and behavioural characteristics, is much more closely related to species in the genus Catharacta, especially to the Northern Hemisphere-breeding Great skua, C. skua, than it is to the other two Stercorarius skuas, the Arctic skua, S. parasiticus and the Longtailed skua, S. longicaudus. Three possible explanations that might account for this discordant aspect of skua phylogeny are explored. These involve (i) the segregation of ancestral polymorphism, (ii) convergent evolution of morphology and behaviour or (iii) intergeneric hybridization. The available evidence from both nuclear and mitochondrial genomes does not exclude any of these hypotheses. Thus, resolution of this enigma of skua phylogeny awaits further work.
S429	B. L. Cohen;S. Stark;A. B. Gawthrop;M. E. Burke;C. W. Thayer	1998	Comparison of articulate brachiopod nuclear and mitochondrial gene trees leads to a clade-based redefinition of protostomes (Protostomozoa) and deuterostomes (Deuterostomozoa)	Proceedings of the Royal Society B	265	1395	475-482	10.1098/rspb.1998.0319		brachiopod; protostome; phoronid; deuterostome; ectoproct; Protostomozoa	Nuclear and mtDNA sequences from selected short-looped telebratuloid (terebratulacean) articulate brachiopods yield congruent and genetically independent phylogenetic reconstructions by parsimony neighbour-joining and maximum likelihood methods, suggesting that both sources of data are reliable guides to brachiopod species phylogeny. The present-day genealogical relationships and geographical distributions of the tested terebratuloid brachiopods are consistent with a tethyan dispersal and subsequent radiation. Concordance of nuclear and mitochondrial gene phylogenies reinforces previous indications that articulate brachiopods, inarticulate brachiopods, phoronids and ectoprocts cluster with other organisms generally regarded as protostomes. Since ontogeny and morphology in brachiopods, ectoprocts and phoronids depart in important respects from those features supposedly diagnostic of protostumes, this demonstrates that the operational definition of protostomy by the usual ontological characters must be misleading or unreliable. New molecular, operational definitions are proposed to replace the traditional criteria for the recognition of protostomes and deuterostomes, and the clade-based terms 'Protostomozoa' and 'Deuterostomozoa' are proposed to replace the existing terms 'Protostomia' and 'Deuterostomia'.
S826	J. A. Schulte II;J. Melville;A. Larson	2003	Molecular phylogenetic evidence for ancient divergence of lizard taxa on either side of Wallace's Line	Proceedings of the Royal Society B	270	1515	597-603	10.1098/rspb.2002.2272		Wallace's Line; Biogeography; Gondwana; Agamidae; Varanidae; Molecular Clock	Wallace's Line, separating the terrestrial faunas of Southeast Asia from the Australia-New Guinea region, is the most prominent and well-studied biogeographic division in the world. Phylogenetically distinct subgroups of major animal and plant groups have been documented on either side of Wallace's Line since it was first proposed in 1859. Despite its importance, the temporal history of fragmentation across this line is virtually unknown and the geological foundation has rarely been discussed. Using molecular phylogenetics and dating techniques, we show that the split between taxa on the Southeast Asian and Australian-New Guinean geological regions occurred during the Late Jurassic to Early Cretaceous in two independent lizard clades. This estimate is compatible with the hypothesis of rifting Gondwanan continental fragments during the Mesozoic and strongly rejects the hypothetical origin of various members of the Australian-New Guinean herpetofauna as relatively recent invasions from Southeast Asia. Our finding suggests an ancient fragementation of lizard taxa on either side of Wallace's Line and provides further evidence that the composition of modern global communities has been significantly affected by rifting and accretion of Gondwanan continental plates during the Mid to Late Mesozoic.
S839	T. D. Swain;D. J. Taylor	2003	Structural ribosomal RNA characters support monophyly of raptorial limbs and paraphyly of limb specialization in water fleas	Proceedings of the Royal Society B							The evolutionary success of arthropods has been partly attributed to the diversity of their limb morphologies. Large morphological diversity and increased specialization is observed in water flea limbs (Cladocera), but it is unclear if the increased limb specialization in different cladoceran orders is the result of shared ancestry or parallel evolution. Here, we inferred the first robust among-order cladoceran phylogeny using small-subunit and large-subunit rRNA nuclear gene sequence, signature sequence regions, novel stem-loops, and secondary structure morphometrics to assess the phylogenetic distribution of limb specialization. The sequence-based and structural rRNA morphometric phylogenies were congruent and suggested monophyly of orders with raptorial limbs, but paraphyly of orders with reduced numbers of specialized limbs. These results highlight the utility of complex molecular structural characters in resolving ancient, rapid radiations.
S837	M. Thollesson;J. L. Norenburg	2003	Ribbon Worm Relationships € A Phylogeny of the phylum Nemertea	Proceedings of the Royal Society B							We present the most extensive phylogenetic analysis to date of higher-level nemertean relationships, based on sequence data from four different genes (the nuclear genes for 28S rRNA and histone H3, and the mitochondrial genes for 16S rRNA and cytochrome c oxidase subunit I, COI). Well-supported clades are in general compatible with earlier, more limited, analyses, and current classification is largely in agreement with our results, although there are some notable exceptions. Bdellonemertea (represented by Malacobdella) is found to be a part of Monostilifera, and Polystilifera is the monophyletic sister group to Monostilifera. Cratenemertidae is the sister group to the remaining monostiliferan (including Malacobdella), a group for which we apply the new name Distromatonemertea. Heteronemertea is monophyletic and forms a clade with Hubrechtella; for this clade we introduce the name Pilidiophora. Finally, Pilidiophora and Hoplonemertea (with Malacobdella) form a monophyletic group and we introduce the name Neonemertea to refer to this group. Palaeonemertea is found to be non-monophyletic and basal among nemerteans.
S1027	T. Wappler;V. S. Smith;R. C. Dalgleish	2004	Scratching an ancient itch: an Eocene bird louse fossil	Proceedings of the Royal Society B	271	Suppl. 5	S255-S258	10.1098/rsbl.2003.0158			Of the thirty extant orders of insects, all but one, the parasitic lice (Insecta: Phthiraptera), have a confirmed fossil record. Here we report the discovery of what appears to be the first bird louse fossil ñ an exceptionally well-preserved specimen collected from the crater of the Eckfeld maar near Manderscheid, Germany. The 44 million year old specimen shows close phylogenetic affinities with modern feather louse ectoparasites of aquatic birds. Preservation of feather remnants in the specimens' foregut confirms its association as a bird ectoparasite. Based on a phylogenetic analysis of the specimen and palaeoecological data we suggest this louse was the parasite of a large ancestor to modern Anseriformes (swans, geese and ducks) or Charadriiformes (shorebirds). The crown group position of this fossil in the phylogeny of lice confirms the groups' long coevolutionary history with birds and points to an early origin for lice, perhaps inherited from early-feathered theropod dinosaurs.
S1458	A. G. Glover;B. Källström;C. R. Smith;T. G. Dahlgren	2005	World-wide whale worms? A new species of Osedax from the shallow north Atlantic	Proceedings of the Royal Society B	272		2587-2592				We describe a new species of the remarkable whalebone-eating siboglinid worm genus, Osedax, from a whale carcass in the shallow north Atlantic, west of Sweden. Previously only recorded from deep-sea (1500 ˆ 3000 m) whale-falls in the north-east Pacific, this is the first species of Osedax known from a shelf-depth whale-fall, and the first from the Atlantic Ocean. The new species, Osedax mucofloris sp. n., is abundant on the bones of an experimentally implanted Minke whale carcass (Balaenoptera acutorostrata) at 125 m depth in the shallow North Sea. O. mucofloris can be cultured on bones maintained in aquaria. The presence of O. mucofloris in the shallow North Sea and north-east Pacific suggests global distribution on whale-falls for the Osedax clade. Molecular evidence from mitochondrial cytochrome oxidase 1 (CO1) and 18S rRNA sequences suggests that O. mucofloris has high dispersal rates, and provides support for the idea of whale-falls acting as Œstepping-stones‚ for the global dispersal of siboglinid annelids over ecological and evolutionary time.
S1338	N. Rønsted;G. D. Weiblen;J. M. Cook;N. Salamin;C. A. Machado;V. Savolainen	2005	60 million years of co-divergence in the fig-wasp symbiosis	Proceedings of the Royal Society B							Figs (Ficus; ca. 750 species) and fig wasps (Agaoninae) are obligate mutualists: all figs are pollinated by agaonines that feed exclusively on figs. This extraordinary symbiosis is the most extreme example of specialization in a plant-pollinator interaction and has fuelled much speculation about co-divergence. The hypothesis that pollinator specialization led to the parallel diversification of fig and pollinator lineages (co-divergence) has so far not been tested due to the lack of robust and comprehensive phylogenetic hypotheses for both partners. We produced and combined the most comprehensive molecular phylogenies to date with fossil data to generate independent age estimates for fig and pollinator lineages, using both nonparametric rate smoothing and penalized likelihood dating methods. Identifying ten pairs of congruent clades, we thereby provide the first and unparalleled example of plant-insect co-divergence over geological times, and for at least the past 60 million years.
S2050	M. Helmkampf;I. Bruchhaus;B. Hausdorf	2008	Phylogenomic analyses of lophophorates (brachiopods, phoronids and bryozoans) confirm the Lophotrochozoa concept	Proceedings of the Royal Society B	275	1645	1927-1933	10.1098/rspb.2008.0372			Based on embryological and morphological evidence, Lophophorata was long considered to be the sister or paraphyletic stem-group of Deuterostomia. In contrast, molecular data have consistently indicated that the three lophophorate lineages, Ectoprocta, Brachiopoda and Phoronida, are more closely related to trochozoans (annelids, molluscs and allies) than to deuterostomes. For this reason, the lophophorate groups and Trochozoa were united to Lophotrochozoa. However, the relationships of the lophophorate lineages within Lophotrochozoa are still largely unresolved. Maximum-likelihood and Bayesian analyses were performed based on a dataset comprising 11,445 amino acid positions derived from 79 ribosomal proteins of 39 metazoan taxa including new sequences obtained from a brachiopod and a phoronid. These analyses show that the three lophophorate lineages are affiliated with trochozoan rather than deuterostome phyla. All hypotheses claiming that they are more closely related to Deuterostomia than to Protostomia can be rejected by topology testing. Monophyly of lophophorates was not recovered but that of Bryozoa including Ectoprocta and Entoprocta and monophyly of Brachiozoa including Brachiopoda and Phoronida were strongly supported. Alternative hypotheses that are refuted include: 1) Brachiozoa as the sister-group of Mollusca; 2) ectoprocts as the sister to all other Lophotrochozoa including Platyzoa; 3) ectoprocts as sister or to all other protostomes except chaetognaths.
S2210	H. Schaefer;C. Heibl;S. S. Renner	2008	Gourds afloat: A dated phylogeny reveals an Asian origin of the gourd family (Cucurbitaceae) and numerous oversea dispersal events	Proceedings of the Royal Society B							Knowing the geographic origin of economically important plants is important for genetic improvement and conservation, but has been slowed by uneven geographic sampling where relatives occur in remote areas of difficult access. Less biased species sampling can be achieved when herbarium collections are included as DNA sources. Here, we address the history of Cucurbitaceae, one of the economically most important families of plants, using a multi-gene phylogeny for 114 of the 115 genera and 25 % of the 960 species. Worldwide sampling was achieved by using specimens from 30 herbaria. Results reveal an Asian origin of Cucurbitaceae in the Late Cretaceous, followed by the repeated spread of lineages into the African, American, and Australian continents via transoceanic long distance dispersal (LDD). North American cucurbits stem from at least seven range expansions of Central and South American lineages; Madagascar was colonized 13 times, always from Africa; Australia was reached twelve times, apparently always from Southeast Asia. Overall, Cucurbitaceae underwent at least 43 successful LDD events over the past 60 my, which would translate into an average of seven LDDs every ten million years. These and similar findings from other angiosperms stress the need for an increased tapping of museum collections to achieve extensive geographic sampling in plant phylogenetics.
S2423	V. Mayer;H. Voglmayr	2009	Mycelial carton galleries of Azteca brevis (Formicidae) as a multispecies network	Proceedings of the Royal Society B	276		3265-3273	10.1098/rspb.2009.0768			Apart from growing fungi for nutrition, as seen in the NewWorld Attini, ants cultivate fungi for reinforcement of the walls of their nests or tunnel-shaped runway galleries. These fungi are grown on organic material such as bark, epiphylls or trichomes, and form stable carton structures . In this study, the carton of the runway galleries built by Azteca brevis (Formicidae, Dolichoderinae) on branches of Tetrathylacium macrophyllum (Flacourtiaceae) is investigated. For the first time, molecular tools are used to address the biodiversity and phylogenetic affinities of fungi involved in tropical ant carton architecture, a previously neglected ant fungus mutualism. The A. brevis carton involves a complex association of several fungi. All the isolated fungi were unequivocally placed within the Chaetothyriales by DNA sequence data. Whereas five types of fungal hyphae were morphologically distinguishable, our DNA data showed that more species are involved, applying a phylogenetic species concept based on DNA phylogenies and hyphal morphology. In contrast to the New World Attini with their many-to-one (different ant species one fungal cultivar) pattern, and temperate Lasius with a one-to-two (one ant species two mutualists) or many-to-one (different ant species share the same mutualist) system, the A. brevis fungi association is a one-to-many multi-species network. Vertical fungus transmission has not yet been found, indicating that the A. brevis fungi interaction is rather generalized.
S2502	T. E. Roberts;T. R. B. Davenport;K. B. P. Hildebrandt;T. Jones;W. T. Stanley;E. J. Sargis;L. E. Olson	2010	The biogeography of introgression in the critically endangered African monkey Rungwecebus kipunji	Proceedings of the Royal Society of London, Biological Sciences, Biology Letters	6	2	233-237	10.1098/rsbl.2009.0741			In the four years since its original description, the taxonomy of the kipunji (Rungwecebus kipunji), a geographically restricted and critically endangered African monkey, has been the subject of much debate, and recent research suggesting that the first voucher specimen of Rungwecebus has baboon mitochondrial DNA has intensified the controversy. We show that Rungwecebus from a second region of Tanzania has a distinct mitochondrial haplotype that is basal to a clade containing all Papio species and the original Rungwecebus voucher, supporting the placement of Rungwecebus as the sister taxon of Papio and its status as a separate genus. We suggest that the Rungwecebus population in the Southern Highlands has experienced geographically localized mitochondrial DNA introgression from Papio, while the Ndundulu population retains the true Rungwecebus mitochondrial genome.
S2475	J. A. Schulte Ii;F. Moreno-Roark	2010	Live birth among iguanian lizards predates Pleistocene-Pliocene glaciations	Proceedings of the Royal Society of London, Biological Sciences, Biology Letters	6	2	216-218	10.1098/rsbl.2009.0707			Among tetrapods, viviparity is estimated to have evolved independently within Squamata (lizards and snakes) more than 100 times, most frequently in species occupying cold climate environments. Because of this relationship with cold climates, it is sometimes assumed that many origins of squamate viviparity occurred over the past 2.5-4 million years during the Pleistocene-Pliocene glaciations; however, this hypothesis is untested. Divergence-dating analysis on a 733-species tree of iguanian lizards recovers 20 independent lineages that have evolved viviparity and among 14 multispecies groups 13 derived live birth prior to glacial advances (8-66 million years ago). These results place the transitions from egg-laying to live birth among squamates in a well-supported historical context to further examine the underlying phenotypic and genetic changes associated with this complex shift in reproduction.
S1317	M. S. Y. Lee;T. W. Reeder;J. B. Slowinski;R. Lawson	2004	Resolving reptile relationships: Molecular and morphological markers	Proceedings of the Tree of Life Symposium							Living reptiles (including birds) form three major clades, lepidosaurs (tuataras and squamates), archosaurs (crocodilians and birds) and turtles. The relationship of turtles to other reptiles is contentious, with morphological evidence indicating they are basal to all other living reptiles, but molecular evidence suggesting a turtle-archosaur clade. However, both data sets are suspect: the morphological data set is highly homoplasious and contains secondary signals placing turtles higher up the reptile tree, while a general increase in the rate of molecular evolution in squamates could cause multiple molecular data sets to artifactually push squamates towards the base of the reptile tree, resulting in a turtle-archosaur clade. Within lepidosaurs, a combined morphological (399 characters) and molecular (12S and 16S rRNA, c-mos, c-myc) analysis finds robust support that snakes are modified anguimorph lizards; this is consistent with palaeontological studies suggesting similarities between large extinct marine anguimorphs (mosasaurs) and primitive, limbed marine snakes. Within snakes, the combined morphological (263 characters) and molecular (12S and 16S rRNA, cyt-b, c-mos) evidence confirms the primitive nature of the limbed marine snakes; among living taxa, however, the burrowing blindsnakes and pipesnakes are the most basal. Living archosaurs - crocodilians and birds - share many striking evolutionary novelties, such as a complex divided heart, gizzard with stomach stones, nest building from vegetation, parental care of nestlings which chirp, and very similar genes. These similarities and implied close relationship justify the classification of birds with crocodilians, as a subgroup of reptiles. This taxonomy is further supported by recent finds of extinct archosaurian reptiles (dinosaurs) with feathers, wishbones and wing-like wrists, which further blur the distinction between birds and non-avian reptiles. Reptiles have provided the empirical ground for the growth of many of the most important advances in systematics, and will continue to do so.
S1480	M. Hoppenrath;B. S. Leander	2006	Ebriid phylogeny and the expansion of the Cercozoa	Protist							Ebria tripartita is a phagotrophic flagellate present in marine coastal plankton communities worldwide. This is one of two (possibly four) described extant species in the Ebridea, an enigmatic group of eukaryotes with an unclear phylogenetic position. Ebriids have never been cultured, are usually encountered in low abundance and have a peculiar combination of ultrastructural characters including a large nucleus with permanently condensed chromosomes and an internal skeleton composed of siliceous rods. Consequently, the taxonomic history of the group has been tumultuous and has included a variety of affiliations, such as silicoflagellates, dinoflagellates, Œradiolarians‚ and Œneomonads‚. Today, the Ebridea is treated as a eukaryotic taxon incertae sedis because no morphological or molecular features have been recognized that definitively relate ebriids with any other eukaryotic lineage. We conducted phylogenetic analyses of small subunit rDNA sequences from two multi-specimen isolations of E. tripartita. The closest relatives to the sequences from E. tripartita are environmental sequences from a submarine caldera floor. This newly recognized Ebria clade was most closely related to sequences from described species of Cryothecomonas and Protaspis. These molecular phylogenetic relationships were consistent with current ultrastructural data from all three genera, leading to a robust placement of ebriids within the Cercozoa.
S1901	W. H. C. F. Kooistra;D. Sarno;S. Balzano;H. Gu;R. A. Andersen;A. Zingone	2007	Global diversity and biogeography of Skeletonema species (Bacillariophyta)	Protist							Recent studies have shown that the cosmopolitan diatom Skeletonema costatum sensu lato is composed of several morphologically and genetically distinct species. To assess whether the separate species have a cosmopolitan distribution, we analysed 184 strains from marine and estuarine sites worldwide. We identified the strains using light and electron microscopy, and we sequenced the hyper-variable region of nuclear LSU rDNA. All recently described species were genetically distinct, and all but two were morphologically distinct. Variability was found for the only ultrastructural character used to distinguish Skeletonema dohrnii and S. marinoi, which cannot be identified based on morphology alone. Furthermore, multiple genetically distinct taxa, which may represent cryptic species, were found within the S. menzelii and S. tropicum clades. We found that all currently recognized species of Skeletonema are widespread, however, gaps seem to occur in their geographic ranges. For example, some species are found in both the northern and southern temperate latitudes whereas other species appear to have only subtropical to tropical ranges. Skeletonema pseudocostatum and S. grethae seem to have more restricted geographic ranges because the former was not found along American coasts and the latter was encountered only in US waters. A taxonomic update is provided for Skeletonema strains currently available in several culture collections, which could aid reinterpretation of results obtained in comparative studies using these strains.
S2071	W. L. Marshall;G. Celio;D. J. McLaughlin;M. L. Berbee	2008	Multiple isolations of a culturable, motile Ichthyosporean (Mesomycetozoa, Opisthokonta), Creolimax fragrantissima n. gen., n. sp., from marine invertebrate digestive tracts	Protist							A fragrant, spherical, osmotrophic eukaryote was isolated 27 times from the digestive tracts of marine invertebrates collected from the Northeast Pacific. The isolates were cultured from 7 animal collections over a two-year period, most from the peanut worm, Phascolosoma agassizii. A small subunit ribosomal DNA phylogeny placed the organism within the ichthyosporea, closest to Sphaeroforma arctica and Pseudoperkinsus tapetis. Supporting the conspecificity of isolates, the sequences of ribosomal gene internal transcribed spacer regions determined for 26 isolates were identical, as were the elongation factor 1-alpha-like gene fragments from 7 isolates. Dispersal via amoeboid cells distinguished the species from its closest relatives and led to the erection of a new genus and species, „Creolimax fragrantissima.‰ Vegetative cells reproduced asexually in vitro after they reached 30 to 60 microns in diameter by producing amoebae or endospores, which escaped through openings in the parent cell wall. Ultrathin sections of vegetative cells prepared by high-pressure freeze substitution provided some of the first images of ichthyosporean spindle pole bodies and document, for the first time, tubular extensions of the plasma membrane into an electron-translucent inner layer of the cell wall. Ichthyosporeans are parasites and commensals of animals and culturable species are few. Because „C. fragrantissima‰ can be isolated regularly and repeatedly from nature and then grown easily through cycles of asexual reproduction, it has the potential to serve as a model organism for further research into marine ichthyosporeans.
S2374	J. F. H. Strassert;M. S. Desai;A. Brune;R. Radek	2009	The true diversity of devescovinid flagellates in the termite Incisitermes marginipennis	Protist	160	4	522-535	10.1016/j.protis.2009.04.002			More than 40 years ago, ten species of devescovinid flagellates were described to occur in the gut content of the termite Incisitermes marginipennis. Based on light microscopic examinations, the flagellates were then classified into the two genera Devescovina and Metadevescovina. Here, we combined molecular phylogenetic analysis of the small subunit rRNA genes of the gut flagellates with the first ultrastructural investigation of the genus Metadevescovina. Our results suggest that I. marginipennis contains only one species of devescovinid flagellates, Metadevescovina modica, which comprises three variants of the same phylotype (=99.5% sequence similarity). Monophyly of all Metadevescovina sequences obtained from Pterotermes and Incisitermes species in this and previous studies and the absence of filamentous bacterial epibionts typical of Devescovina species (M. modica is densely colonized with spirochetes) corroborate the validity of the genus Metadevescovina and allow its differentiation from other genera of devescovinid flagellates.
S2422	F. Gómez;D. Moreira;P. López-García	2009	Neoceratium gen. nov., a New Genus for All Marine Species Currently Assigned to Ceratium (Dinophyceae)	Protist	161	1	35-54	10.1016/j.protis.2009.06.004 			The dinoflagellate genus Ceratium contains marine and freshwater species. Freshwater species possess six cingular plates, thick sulcal platelets and usually develop a third hypothecal horn. The marine Ceratium (>62 species) possess five cingular plates and thin sulcal platelets; a third hypothecal horn is atypical. Resting cysts, a common feature in the freshwater species, are unreported in marine species. We illustrate for the first time resting cysts in marine Ceratium (C. furca and C. candelabrum). We obtained small subunit ribosomal RNA gene (SSU rDNA) sequences of 23 Ceratium spp. (more than one third of the total marine species described so far), with representatives of the four acknowledged subgenera. Phylogenetic analyses including the type species, the freshwater C. hirundinella, showed that the four available sequences of freshwater species formed a strongly supported subclade very distant from the marine cluster. Our data support the splitting of Ceratium sensu lato into two genera. Ceratium sensu stricto should remain for freshwater species possessing six cingular plates (three cingular plates in dorsal view). The new genus name, Neoceratium gen. nov. and new combinations, should be applied to the marine species of Ceratium sensu lato which possess five cingular plates (two cingular plates in dorsal view).
S2472	C. D. Lowe;D. J. S. Montagnes;L. E. Martin;P. C. Watts	2009	Patterns of genetic diversity in the marine heterotrophic flagellate Oxyrrhis marina (Alveolata: Dinophyceae)	Protist	161		212-221	10.1016/j.protis.2009.11.003			Oxyrrhis marina is an important model in ecological studies of free-living protists. Despite this, O. marina has rarely been studied in the environment and no explicit distributional studies exist. Further, phylogenetic data for a small number of isolates indicate that O. marina constitutes two divergent lineages. Here, we quantify phylogenetic variation between 58 globally distributed O. marina isolates using 5.8S - internal transcribed spacer 1 and 2 rDNA (5.8S ITS) and cytochrome c oxidase I (COI) partial sequences. 5.8S ITS and COI phylogenies both partitioned O. marina into four clades, which formed two lineages; mean sequence identity for 5.8S ITS and COI respectively was ~40 and 90% between these two lineages. Sequence identities for 5.8S ITS/ COI between clades within lineages were 66.3/99.4% (lineage 1: clade 1 vs 2) and 42.3/99.1% (lineage 2: clade 3 vs 4). rDNA mutation rates in O. marina appear to be abnormally high and were not interpreted in a species delineation context. Based on variation in COI sequence and comparisons with other protists, we suggest that O. marina lineages may constitute two species. In a geographic context, evidence of spatial restriction but also extensive overlap between O. marina clades occurred. Further, clade abundances varied considerably: clades 1 and 2 (belonging to one lineage) were abundant and widespread; in contrast, clades 3 and 4 (belonging to the second lineage) were rare and spatially restricted (occurring only in the Mediterranean or in culture collection). There is need for further phylogenetic and taxonomic studies to assess species delineation in O. marina, and for the application of high resolution genetic markers to resolve processes driving genetic diversity in this important model organism.
S1173	D. L. Reed;V. S. Smith;A. R. Rogers;S. L. Hammond;D. H. Clayton	2004	Molecular genetic analysis of human lice supports direct contact between modern and archaic humans	Public Library of Science							Parasites can be used as unique markers to investigate host evolutionary history, independent of host data. Here we show that modern human head lice, Pediculus humanus, are composed of two ancient lineages, whose origin predates modern Homo sapiens by an order of magnitude (ca. 1.18 million years). One of the two louse lineages has a worldwide distribution and appears to have undergone a population bottleneck ca. 100,000 years ago along with its modern H. sapiens host. Phylogenetic and population genetic data suggest that the other lineage, found only in the New World, has remained isolated from the worldwide lineage for the last 1.18 million years. The ancient divergence between these two lice is contemporaneous with splits among early species of Homo, and cospeciation analyses suggest that the two louse lineages codiverged with a now-extinct species of Homo and the lineage leading to modern H. sapiens. If these lice indeed codiverged with their hosts ca. 1.18 MYA, then a recent host switch from an archaic species of Homo to modern H. sapiens is required to explain the occurrence of both lineages on modern H. sapiens. Such a host switch would require direct physical contact between modern and archaic forms of Homo.
S519	J. Li;M. J. Donoghue;D. E. Boufford	2001	Phylogenetics of Buckleya (Santalaceae) based on ITS sequences of nrDNA	Rhodora	103	914	137-150		http://www.phylodiversity.net/donoghue/publications/MJD_papers/2001/105_Li_Rhodora01.pdf	biogeography; Bucleya; Santalaceae; ITS; phylogeny; molecular clock	Buckleya (Santalaceae) is a hemi-parasitic, shrubby genus with two species in China, one in Japan, and one in the southeastern United States. Phylogenetic relationships among these species are controversial and have not been tested using molecular data. In this study we used sequences of the internal transcribed spacer region of nuclear ribosomal DNA to test previous phylogenetic hypotheses. Two sister species pairs are well supported: B. distichophylla plus B. graebneriana, and B. lanceolata plus B. henryi. Sequence differences and morphological characters support the recognition of B. lanceolata and B. henryi. Sequence divergence between B. distichophylla and B. graebneriana is twice as high as that between B. lanceolata and B. henryi. These results are most consistent with the treatment proposed by Carvell and Eshbaugh. Biogeographically, one of the Chinese species (B. graebneriana) is most closely related to the eastern North American species (B. distichophylla), while the other Chinese species (B. henryi) is allied with the Japanese species (B. lanceolata). Maximum likelihood analyses do not reject clock-like evolution of nrDNA ITS spacers in Buckleya, and divergence times may date to the Late Miocene and Pliocene.
S398	M. S. Hafner;P. D. Sudman;F. X. Villablanca;T. A. Spradling;J. W. Demastes;S. A. Nadler	1994	Disparate rates of molecular evolution in cospeciating hosts and parasites	Science	265		1087-90				DNA sequences for the gene encoding mitochondrial cytochrome oxidase I in a group of rodents (pocket gophers) and their ectoparasites (chewing lice) provide evidence for cospeciation and reveal different rates of molecular evolution in the hosts and their parasites. The overall rate of nucleotide substitution (both silent and replacement changes) is approximately three times higher in lice, and the rate of synonymous substitution (based on analysis of fourfold degenerate sites) is approximately an order of magnitude greater in lice. The difference in synonymous substitution rate between lice and gophers correlates with a difference of similar magnitude in generation times.
S416	S. Mathews;M. J. Donoghue	1999	The root of angiosperm phylogeny inferred from duplicate phytochrome genes	Science	286	5441	947-950	10.1126/science.286.5441.947			Understanding the radiation of flowering plants depends critically on positioning the root of the angiosperm tree. An analysis of duplicate phytochrome genes (PHYA and PHYC) is used to root the angiosperms, thereby avoiding the inclusion of highly diverged outgroup sequences. The results unambiguously place the root near Amborella (one species, New Caledonia), and resolve water-lilies (Nymphaeales, ~ 70 species, cosmopolitan), then Austrobaileya (one species, Australia), as early branches. These findings bear directly on the interpretation of morphological evolution and diversification within angiosperms.
S655	I. Ruiz-Trillo;M. Riutort;D. T. J. Littlewood;E. A. Herniou;J. Baguñà	1999	Acoel flatworms: earliest extant bilaterian metazoans, not members of the Platyhelminthes	Science	283	5409	1919-1923	10.1126/science.283.5409.1919			Because of their simple organization the Acoela have been considered to be either primitive bilaterians or descendants of coelomates through secondary loss of derived features. Sequence data of 18S ribosomal DNA genes from non-fast evolving species of acoels and other metazoans reveal that this group does not belong to the Platyhelminthes but represents the extant members of the earliest divergent Bilateria, an interpretation that is supported by recent studies on the embryonic cleavage pattern and nervous system of acoels. This study has implications for understanding the evolution of major body plansl, and for perceptions of the Cambrian evolutionary explosion.
S1135	G. W. Rouse;S. K. Goffredi;R. C. Vrijenhoek	2004	Osedax: Bone-eating marine worms with dwarf males	Science	305		668-671				We describe a new genus, Osedax, and two new species of annelids with females that consume the bones of dead whales via ramifying roots. Molecular and morphological evidence revealed that Osedax belongs to the Siboglinidae, which includes pogonophoran and vestimentiferan worms from deep-sea vents, seeps, and anoxic basins. Osedax has skewed sex ratios with numerous dwarf (paedomorphic) males that live in the tubes of females. DNA sequences reveal that the two Osedax species diverged about 42 million years ago and currently maintain large populations ranging from 105 to 106 adult females.
S1518	C. S. Moreau;C. D. Bell;R. Vila;S. B. Archibald;N. E. Pierce	2006	Phylogeny of the Ants: Diversification in the Age of Angiosperms	Science	312		101-104				We present a large-scale molecular phylogeny of the ants (Hymenoptera: Formicidae), based on 4.5 kilobases of sequence data from six gene regions extracted from 139 of the 288 described extant genera, representing 19 of the 20 subfamilies. All but two subfamilies are recovered as monophyletic. Divergence time estimates calibrated by minimum age constraints from 43 fossils indicate that most of the subfamilies representing extant ants arose much earlier than previously proposed but only began to diversify during the Late Cretaceous to Early Eocene. This period also witnessed the rise of angiosperms and most herbivorous insects.
S2079	S. J. Hackett;R. T. Kimball;S. Reddy;R. C. K. Bowie;E. L. Braun;M. J. Braun;J. L. Chojnowski;W. A. Cox;K. Han;J. Harshman;C. J. Huddleston;B. D. Marks;K. J. Miglia;W. S. Moore;F. H. Sheldon;D. W. Steadman;C. C. Witt;T. Yuri	2008	A Phylogenomic study of birds reveals their evolutionary history	Science	20	588	1763-1768	10.1126/science.1157704			Deep avian relationships have been difficult to resolve due to a putative explosive radiation. Our study examined ~32kb of aligned nuclear DNA sequences from 19 independent loci for 169 species representing all major extant groups and recovered a robust phylogeny from genome-wide signal supported by multiple analytical methods. We documented well-supported, novel interordinal relationships, such as a sister relationship between passerines and parrots, and corroborated previously contentious groupings, such as flamingos and grebes. Our conclusions challenge current classifications and alter our understanding of trait evolution, for example, some diurnal birds evolved from nocturnal ancestors. Our results provide a valuable resource for phylogenetic and comparative studies in birds.
S1x6x97c14c42c30	J. A. Coddington	1990	Ontogeny and Homology in the Male Palpus of Orb-weaving Spiders and Their Relatives, with Comments on Phylogeny (Araneoclada: Araneoidea, Deinopoidea)	Smithsonian Contributions to Zoology	496		1-52		http://hdl.handle.net/10088/5479		The higher level cladistic structure of cribellate spiders (Araneomorphae) and ontogenetic evidence relevant to the homology of sclerites in the male spider palp arc reviewed, with the aim of clarifying orb-weaver phylogeny. The habitual use of a small set of terms for rather different palpal structures seems to have obscured homologies and therefore the monophyly of groups. Outgroup comparison of palp structure in various cribellate superfamilies (e.g., Dictynoidea and Amaurobioidea)can be used to polarize characters in orb-weaving spiders (Orbiculariae), and palp structure in Deinopoidea to polarize palp characters in Araneoidea. Results are that the radix of Linyphiidae and Araneidae may be synapomorphic, but the radix in such families as Oecobiidae, Uloboridae, and Theridiidae is in each case an autapomorphy of those taxa. The terminal apophysis in lycosoid taxa is entirely different from that in Araneoidea, and even within Araneoidea terminal apophyses in Theridiidae, Araneidae, and Tetragnathidae apparently are not homologous. On the other hand, possession of a median apophysis is probably primitive for Araneoidea. Problems surrounding the use of the terms median apophysis and conductor for various uloborid sclerites are discussed. A tentative cladogram of 32 orbicularian taxa, based on 87 binary and multistate characters, is presented.
S11x16x96c21c04c59	C. E. Griswold	1993	Investigations into the phylogeny of the lycosoid spiders and their kin (Arachnida: Araneae: Lycosoidea)	Smithsonian Contributions to Zoology	539		1-39		http://hdl.handle.net/10088/5330		The phylogenetic relationships of spider families classically placed in the superfamily Lycosoidea, which possess a grate-shaped tapetum in some or all of the indirect eyes, are examined through exemplar taxa scored for 68 classical or newly elaborated characters. A derived calamistrum, which forms an oval to rectangular patch, is considered a synapomorphy uniting the Lycosoidea and several other genera formerly placed in the Tengellidae and Miturgidae. In the resulting analysis the Lycosoidea are shown to be monophyletic and the Tengellidae and Miturgidae polyphyletic. The Senoculidae, Oxyopidae, Stiphidiidae, and Psechridae form a monophyletic group. The monophyly of the Lycosidae, Trechaleidae (including Rhoicininae), Pisauridae plus Dolomedidae, and Zoropsidae are confirmed, whereas monophyly of the Ctenidae, Machadoniinae, and Uliodoninae are called into question.
S2008	H. Kellner;P. Luis;B. Zimdars;B. Kiesel;F. Buscot	2008	Diversity of bacterial laccase-like multicopper oxidase genes in forest and grassland Cambisol soil samples	Soil Biology & Biochemistry	40		638-648				Laccases- or laccase-like multicopper oxidases (LMCO) catalyze the oxidation of various substrates, such as phenols, diamines and metals, coupled with the reduction of molecular oxygen to water. Compared to studies on function and diversity of LMCO in plants and fungi, little is known about this enzyme type in bacteria and especially on their possible implication in degradation of organic matter in soils. This study presents a molecular investigation of the diversity and distribution of bacterial LMCO genes among three upper horizons of a forest Cambisol and in a grassland Cambisol. Some culture strains of soil bacteria were also analyzed at the molecular level and for their capability to oxidize naturally occurring 2,6-dimethoxyphenol, a LMCO substrate. A high LMCO gene diversity was found in the Cambisol soil samples with 16 distinct sequence type clades, of which approximately one half was not matching with any reference sequence of known bacteria. The highest richness of bacterial LMCO genes was observed in the organic horizon of the forest soil, which is concomitant with a previous analysis of the diversity of fungal laccase genes and corresponding soil laccase activity. Some clusters of sequence types showed a specific distribution in one of the soils or in horizons, while others appeared more ubiquist. Multiple bacterial LMCO genes were described in Agromyces salentinus and Sinorhizobium morelense, what so far was only known from fungi.
S2290	H. Kellner;D. R. Zak	2009	Detection of expressed fungal type I polyketide synthase genes in a forest soil	Soil Biology and Biochemistry	41	6	1344-1347	10.1016/j.soilbio.2009.02.033			Secondary metabolites synthesized via the polyketide pathway by polyketide sythases (PKS) are thought to mediate interference competition between soil microorganisms as well as cell-to-cell signaling. Although their synthesis has been documented in laboratory culture, it remains uncertain whether these compounds are actually produced under field conditions. Here, we report the presence and expression of fungal type I PKS genes in the organic horizon of a forest soil. If these expressed PKS genes produce compounds that elicit antagonistic interactions among soil microorganisms, then it could be a factor structuring microbial communities in soil.
S2321	H. Kellner;P. Luis;B. Schlitt;F. Buscot	2009	Temporal changes in diversity and expression patterns of fungal laccase genes within the organic horizon of a brown forest soil	Soil Biology and Biochemistry	41	7	1380-1389	10.1016/j.soilbio.2009.03.012			Temporal fluctuations of present and expressed fungal genes encoding the ligninolytic enzyme laccase were examined bimonthly between March 2004 and April 2005 in the organic horizon of a beech forest Cambisol. Using two sets of degenerate primer pairs, we detected 73 different basidiomycete laccase genes from soil DNA extracts and 42 different transcripts of asco- and basidiomycetes from soil RNA extracts (cDNA libraries). Phylogenetic analysis related the sequences to fungal taxa. The highest fungal laccase gene richness in soil DNA and RNA samples were found in August, October and January, and followed the input of fresh litter into soil. The highest change of the fungal laccase gene population was observed from October to January, but no distinct temporal change in the total soil laccase activity was measured. Present and expressed laccase gene populations were highly different, implying different subsets amplified with our primer sets and likely impacting future research strategies. Despite considerable variations in gene presence and expression, we found a steady expression and high soil enzyme activity of fungal laccases at each sampling date, thus presumably laccases have major impacts to soil organic matter turnover and stabilisation processes.
S2x3x96c17c31c41	J. J. A. van der Walt;J. P. Roux	1991	Taxonomy and phylogeny of Pelargonium section Campylia	South African Journal of Botany	57		291-293				The habit, leaf morphology, floral characters, pollen structure and chromosome numbers of Pelargonium incarnatum (L'Herit.) Moench, P. ocellatum J.J.A. v.d. Walt and P. setulosum Turcz. showed that they should be included in section Campylia (Sweet) DC. A key to identity the species of section Campylia s.l. is provided. Despite the considerable variation in floral structure of the species it is concluded that section Campylia s.l. is a natural taxon. The possible phylogenetic relationships of the species are determined by means of a cladistic analysis.
S334	M. Baehr;B. Baehr	1993	The Hersiliidae of the Oriental Region including New Guinea. Taxonomy, phylogeny, zoogeography (Arachnida, Araneae)	Spixiana - Supplement	19						The Hersiliidae of the Oriental Region and of New Guinea are revised. The following genera have been newly erected: Neotama, gen. nov. for Tama variata Pocock and three additional new species, and Promurricia, gen. nov. for P. depressa, spec. nov. The genus Tamopsis Baehr & Baehr is recorded for the first time from outside of Australia (New Guinea). All valid species have been fully redescribed. Following 27 species have been newly described: Hersilia albinota, H. baliensis, H. clypealis, H. deelemanae, H. facialis, H. fend, H. flagellifera, H. impressifrons, H. kinabaluensis, H. madang, H. martens), H. mjoebergi, H. nentwigi, H. nepalensis, H. novaeguineae, H. simplicipalpis, H. sundaica, H. tibialis, H. vicina; Promurricia depressa; Murricia cornuta, M. crinifera, M. triangularis; Neotama longimana, N. punctigera, N. rothorum; Tamopsis wau. The following names have been synonymized: Hersilia clathrata Thorell with Hersilia saviguyi Lucas, and Hersilia stevensi Sinha with Hersilia sumatrana (Thorell). For Hersilia caudata Audouin and Hersilia saviguyi Lucas a lectotype and paralectotypes have been designated. The following species remain doubtful because the type(s) are lost, or have not been received for examination, or are immature, and because the descriptions are too poor as to allow reliable identification or even grouping in one of our species-groups: Hersilia celebensis Thorell, H. fletcheri Sinha, H. kalimpongensis Sinha, H. moulmeinensis Sinha, H. pegua na Thorell, H. pern ix Kulczynski, H. siamensis Simon, Mu rricia indica (Lucas), and Tama gravely) Sinha. Hence, these species are not included in our keys. Keys are provided to all genera of Hersiliidae, to the species-groups of the genus Hersilia, and to the species of the genera Hersilia, Murricia, and Neotama. The species of the genus Hersilia are grouped into 10 species-groups, assumed to form monophyletic units. The phylogenetic relations of the species-groups, as well as those of all genera are examined and shown in a cladogram. Phylogenetic evidence shows that the plesiomorphic genera Hersiliola and Tama live in semiarid areas of Africa and the Near East, or in northern Africa, respectively. They are ground-living, web-building, and in the case of Hersiliola also shortlegged species with very short spinnerets, that maintain an atypical and presumably original way of life. As also the most plesiomorphic species-group of Hersilia occurs mainly in Africa, we think that the family on the whole, as well as the genera Hersiliola, Tama, and Hersilia evolved in Africa. From there they spread to the Oriental region, to give there birth to a rather diverse evolution of the genus Hersilia, as well as to the genera Promurricia and Murricia that stem from a Hersilia-like ancestor. In Asia they adopted new habits and new habitats, becoming tree-living species, some of which immigrated into the rain forest. The origin of the, in terms of genitalic morphology, rather plesiomorphic, Oriental-Neotropical genus Neotama is still obscure, though the highly evolutive, mainly Australian genus Tamopsis presumably evolved from a common ancestor with Neotama. Dr. Martin Baehr, Dr. Barbara Baehr, Zoologische Staatssammlung, Munchhausenstral3e 21, D-81247 Munchen.
S1157	P. W. Crous;J. Z. Groenewald;J. P. Mansilla;G. C. Hunter;M. J. Jones	2004	Phylogenetic reassessment of Mycosphaerella spp. and their anamorphs occurring on Eucalyptus	Studies in Mycology							Species of Eucalyptus, mostly native to Australia, are widely planted as exotics in the tropics and Southern Hemisphere. These plantations represent an important source of fuel-wood, structural timber and pulp. Eucalyptus plantations are, however, vulnerable to infection by pathogens, including Mycosphaerella spp. and their anamorphs, which have caused substantial damage, in many parts of the world. More than 30 species of Mycosphaerella, and close to 30 anamorph species for which the Mycosphaerella state remains unknown, are associated with leaf and shoot disease on Eucalyptus spp., worldwide. Although several studies using DNA sequence data have been applied to resolve the phylogenetic relationships between Mycosphaerella spp. on Eucalyptus, the number of species treated has been incomplete. In the present study, isolates of 44 Mycosphaerella species or their anamorphs associated with lesions on Eucalyptus leaves were compared based on DNA sequence data for the internal transcribed spacer region (ITS1 & ITS2) and the 5.8S gene. In addition, DNA sequence data from the elongation factor 1-a and the b-tubulin gene regions were used to resolve species in the M. nubilosa species complex. As a result of these comparisons, 11 new species are described. Mycosphaerella juvenis is reduced to synonymy with M. nubilosa and an epitype specimen and ex-epitype culture are designated for the latter. Mycosphaerella nubilosa is recorded as a serious agent of Mycosphaerella leaf blotch on E. globulus in Spain. This is also the first definitive record of this pathogen occurring on Eucalyptus in Europe.
S1178	P. W. Crous;J. Z. Groenewald;K. Pongpanich;W. Himaman;M. Arzanlou;M. J. Wingfield	2004	Cryptic speciation and host specificity among Mycosphaerella spp. occurring on Australian Acacia species grown as exotics in the tropics	Studies in Mycology							Species of Mycosphaerella and their anamorphs represent serious pathogens of two phyllodenous species of Acacia, A. mangium and A. crassicarpa. In recent years, these fungi have been collected during surveys in South America and South-East Asia, where these trees are widely planted as exotics. In this study, the Mycosphaerella spp. and their anamorphs were identified based on morphological and cultural characteristics. Identifications were confirmed using comparisons of DNA sequences for the internal transcribed spacer (ITS1 & ITS2), the 5.8S rRNA gene, elongation factor 1-a, histone 3, actin and calmodulin gene regions. The data revealed six new taxa, of which three are named in this study, along with their anamorphs. Cercospora acaciae-mangii, which is morphologically part of the C. apii sensu lato species complex, is distinguished based on its distinct phylogeny. Mycosphaerella acaciigena, collected in Venezuela, is distinguished from M. konae and M. heimii, and described as new. Mycosphaerella thailandica, a new species occurring on Acacia and Musa, is shown to a sibling species to M. colombiensis, a foliar pathogen of Eucalyptus. Mycosphaerella citri, an important leaf and fruit pathogen of Citrus (Rutaceae), is shown to also occur on Musa (Musaceae) and Acacia (Leguminosae).
S1147	P. W. Crous;J. Z. Groenewald;J. M. Risede;N. L. Hywel-Jones	2004	Calonectria species and their Cylindrocladium anamorphs: species with sphaeropedunculate vesicles	Studies in Mycology							Species of Cylindrocladium have wide host ranges, and are commonly distributed in soils of tropical and subtropical regions of the world. In the present study several isolates, which have been baited from soils from various parts of the world, are compared based on morphology, as well as DNA sequence data from their b-tubulin, histone, elongation factor 1-a and calmodulin gene regions. As a result of these studies, eight new species with sphaeropedunculate vesicles and 1-septate conidia are described. An emended key is provided to distinguish these species from others in the Cy. floridanum species complex.
S1211	M. Gryzenhout;H. Myburg;N. A. v d Merwe;B. D. Wingfield;M. J. Wingfield	2004	Chrysoporthe, a new genus to accommodate Cryphonectria cubensis	Studies in Mycology	50						Cryphonectria cubensis is an important canker pathogen of tree species residing in the Myrtaceae and Melastomataceae. Recent phylogenetic studies based on multiple gene sequence comparisons have revealed that isolates of C. cubensis group separately from other Cryphonectria species. Within the C. cubensis clade, isolates formed three distinct sub-clades that include isolates mainly from South America, South Africa and South East Asia, respectively. In this study, we establish a new genus, Chrysoporthe, for this species. Chrysoporthe is characterized by superficial, blackened conidiomata, limited ascostromatic tissue, and blackened perithecial necks protruding from the orange stromatal surface. Although specimens of C. cubensis from South East Asia and South America reside in two distinct phylogenetic sub-clades, they could not be separated or distinguished from the type specimen, originating from Cuba, based on morphological characteristics. For the present, these specimens are collectively transferred to Chrysoporthe as a single species, Chrysoporthe cubensis. Specimens previously treated as C. cubensis from South Africa reside in a discrete phylogenetic clade and could be distinguished from those in the other sub-clades based on having longer asci and ascospores with rounded apices as opposed to tapered apices. The South African fungus is described as Chrysoporthe austroafricana. Isolates from Tibouchina spp. in Colombia resided in a fourth sub-clade of Chrysoporthe. Isolates in this phylogenetic assemblage grew optimally at 25 °C in contrast to those in the other groups that grew optimally at 30 °C. No sexual state is known for the fungus in this fourth sub-clade and a new anamorph genus and species name, Chrysoporthella hodgesiana, is provided for it.
S1207	F. Halleen;H. J. Schroers;J. Z. Groenewald;P. W. Crous	2004	Novel species of Cylindrocarpon (Neonectria) and Campylocarpon gen. nov. associated with black foot disease of grapevines (Vitis spp.)	Studies in Mycology	50						Four Cylindrocarpon or Cylindrocarpon-like taxa isolated from asymptomatic or diseased Vitis vinifera plants in nurseries and vineyards of South Africa, New Zealand, Australia, and France were morphologically and phylogenetically compared with other Neonectria/Cylindrocarpon taxa. Sequences of the partial nuclear large subunit ribosomal DNA (LSU rDNA), internal transcribed spacers 1 and 2 of the rDNA including the 5.8S rDNA gene (ITS), and partial ß-tubulin gene introns and exons were used for phylogenetic inference. Neonectria/Cylindrocarpon species clustered in mainly three groups. One monophyletic group consisted of three subclades comprising (i) members of the Neonectria radicicola/Cylindrocarpon destructans complex, which contained strains isolated from grapevines in South Africa, New Zealand, and France; (ii) a Neonectria/Cylindrocarpon species isolated from grapevines in South Africa, Canada (Ontario), Australia (Tasmania), and New Zealand, described here as Cylindrocarpon macrodidymum; and (iii) an assemblage of species closely related to strains identified as Cylindrocarpon cylindroides, the type species of Cylindrocarpon. This monophyletic group excluded two other groups, which comprised (i) members of the Neonectria mammoidea complex, with anamorphs characterised by curved macroconidia, violet or purple pigments in cultures of most of its members, and lack of microconidia and chlamydospores; and (ii) two undescribed Cylindrocarpon-like species, both from grapevines in South Africa. The latter two clades formed a paraphyletic group in LSU rDNA analysis but were supported as a monophyletic group in ITS and ß-tubulin gene analysis. Strains of the Neonectria radicicola/Cylindrocarpon destructans complex isolated from grapevines matched C. destructans in morphology and DNA sequences. Cylindrocarpon macrodidymum formed micro- and macroconidia, but rarely formed chlamydospores. Its mostly 3-septate macroconidia were more or less straight, minutely widening towards the tip, and had an apical cell slightly bent to one side. Its teleomorph, Neonectria macrodidyma, was obtained in mating experiments, and was characterised by smooth to finely warted ascospores, smooth to finely warted perithecia, and moderately sized angular to subglobose cells in the outer region of the perithecial wall. The other two undescribed Cylindrocarpon-like species mentioned above were characterised by mostly 3ˆ5-septate, curved macroconidia, and by the lack of microconidia. Both species differed from members of the Neonectria mammoidea group by brownish colonies and by brownish hyphal strands formed in the aerial mycelium. For these species a new genus, Campylocarpon gen. nov., is proposed. It comprises the new species Campylocarpon fasciculare and Campylocarpon pseudofasciculare, respectively. Inoculation of 6-mo-old potted grapevine rootstocks (cv. Ramsey) with selected isolates of Cylindrocarpon destructans, Neonectria macrodidyma, Campylocarpon fasciculare, and Campylocarpon pseudofasciculare resulted in a reduced root and shoot mass of inoculated plants and appearance of symptoms typical of black foot disease.
S1179	W. Jaklitsch;H. Voglmayr	2004	Hapalocystis occidentalis - a new species of Diaporthales from North America and a key to the species of Hapalocystis	Studies in Mycology	50						Hapalocystis occidentalis W.M. Jaklitsch & H. Voglmayr is described as a new species in the Diaporthales based on morphological observations and phylogenetic analyses of partial nuclear large subunit ribosomal DNA sequences. A key to the six species recognised in the genus Hapalocystis Auersw. ex Fuckel is presented.
S1149	S. Lee;J. Z. Groenewald;P. W. Crous	2004	Phylogenetic reassessment of the coelomycete genus Harknessia and its teleomorph Wuestneia (Diaporthales), and the introduction of Apoharknessia gen. nov	Studies in Mycology							During routine surveys for microfungi from the Fynbos of the Cape Floral Kingdom in South Africa, isolates of several Harknessia species were collected. Additional isolates of Harknessia spp. were collected from Eucalyptus leaves in South Africa, as well as elsewhere in the world where this crop is grown. Interspecific relationships of Harknessia species were inferred based on partial sequence of the internal transcribed spacer (ITS) nuclear ribosomal DNA (nrDNA), as well as the b-tubulin and calmodulin genes. From these data, three new species are described, namely H. globispora from Eucalyptus, H. protearum from Leucadendron and Leucospermum, and H. capensis from Brabejum stellatifolium and Eucalyptus sp. Furthermore, based on large subunit nrDNA sequence data, Harknessia is shown to be heterogeneous, and a new genus, Apoharknessia, is introduced for A. insueta, which is distinguished from H. eucalypti, the type species of Harknessia, by having an apical conidial appendage. A morphologically similar genus, Dwiroopa, which is characterized by several prominent germ slits along the sides of its conidia, is shown to cluster basal to Harknessia. Species of Harknessia, and their teleomorphs accommodated in Wuestneia, are shown to represent an undescribed family in the Diaporthales, as is Apoharknessia, for which no teleomorph is known.
S1150	C. L. Lennox;M. Serdani;J. Z. Groenewald;P. W. Crous	2004	Prosopidicola mexicana gen. et. sp. nov., causing a new pod disease of Prosopis species	Studies in Mycology							Species of Prosopis introduced into South Africa from the Americas for fuel wood, shade and fodder, have become naturalized and widespread in the dry northwestern areas of this country. Invasive Prosopis species have been the target of a biological control programme in South Africa since 1985. During a survey for potential fungal biological control agents in Mexico and Texas in 2001, a pod disease was recorded on Prosopis glandulosa in both countries. The disease is characterized by black/grey pycnidia, flattening of the pods, and seed decay. Morphological investigations of the causal organism showed it to be a Coniothyrium-like coelomycete. However, based on conidiogenous cell morphology and proliferation, we concluded that the organism is not congeneric with Coniothyrium s. str. Phylogenetic analysis of the SSU gene placed this fungus in the Diaporthales. Parsimony analysis of the ITS region (ITS-1, 5.8S, ITS-2) revealed it to group closely to Cryphonectria and Endothia. Consequently, a new genus, Prosopidicola, with type species Prosopidicola mexicana, is proposed.
S1133	D. Pavlic;B. Slippers;T. A. Coutinho;M. Gryzenhout;M. J. Wingfield	2004	Lasiodiplodia gonubiensis sp. nov., a new Botryosphaeria anamorph from native Syzygium cordatum in South Africa	Studies in Mycology							Botryosphaeria spp. are common and widely distributed pathogens on many economically important crops, including forest tree species. These fungi cause a wide variety of symptoms on trees of all ages, but are mostly associated with canker and die-back of branches and main stems. As disease agents, Botryosphaeria spp. are often encountered in their anamorph state, namely species of Fusicoccum, Diplodia or Lasiodiplodia. During a recent survey of botryosphaeriaceous fungi from native Syzygium cordatum in South Africa, an unfamiliar Lasiodiplodia sp. was isolated. The aim of this study was to compare this apparently undescribed species with other species of Botryosphaeria using morphological characteristics and DNA sequence data of the rDNA internal transcribed spacers, ITS1 and ITS2. Based on sequence data, the isolates from S. cordatum were more closely related to B. rhodina (anamorph Lasiodiplodia theobromae) than other Botryosphaeria spp., but also phylogenetically distinct from this species. Conidia of the species from S. cordatum were also different to those of L. theobromae. We conclude that the isolates from S. cordatum represent an undescribed Lasiodiplodia sp. and provide the name Lasiodiplodia gonubiensis for it.
S1183	M. Réblová;L. Mostert;W. Gams;P. W. Crous	2004	New genera in the Calosphaeriales: Togniniella and its anamorph Phaeocrella, and Calosphaeriophora as anamorph of Calosphaeria	Studies in Mycology	50						During a survey of perithecial ascomycetes in New Zealand, two collections of a Togninia-like fungus were made on decayed wood. In culture, colonies produced a Phaeoacremonium-like anamorph. In order to reveal the phylogenetic relationships of the unknown fungus and its affinity to Togninia and other genera in the Calosphaeriales, sequences of nuclear LSU and SSU ribosomal DNA were obtained of several members of this order. These data, supported by morphological and cultural characteristics, confirm that the New Zealand fungus represents a new genus very close to Calosphaeria. The genus Togniniella is proposed here to accommodate these collections, while Phaeocrella is established for their anamorphs. Furthermore, Calosphaeria pulchella was found to form a distinct Acremonium-like anamorph in culture, for which the genus Calosphaeriophora is proposed. Pleurostoma with Pleurostomophora anamorphs is a sister genus to the above two genera, forming the Pleurostomataceae. Togninia with its Phaeoacremonium anamorphs, together with Jobellisia, are closer to the Diaporthales, and deserve the rank of family, for which Togniniaceae is proposed. The presence of significantly different anamorphs in the Calosphaeriales, as well as obvious differences in teleomorph morphology of species accommodated in Calosphaeria, suggest that both the Calosphaeriales and Calosphaeria as presently perceived, are polyphyletic.
S1182	M. Reblova;K. A. Seifert	2004	Conioscyphascus, a new ascomycetous genus for holomorphs with Conioscypha anamorphs	Studies in Mycology	50						The new genus Conioscyphascus is described for the teleomorph of the hyphomycete Conioscypha varia, and a second species C. gracilis, based on Debaryella gracilis. Species of the new genus produce inconspicuous, superficial or immersed, ostiolate, smooth, hyaline to pale orange, perithecia with two-layered walls, hyaline, septate paraphyses, 8-spored unitunicate asci with a refractive J- apical annulus, and fusiform 3-7 septate ascospores. Phylogenetic analyses of alignments of large and small subunit rDNA sequences suggest a strongly supported, close relationship among the three Conioscypha species sampled and Ascotaiwania and Carpoligna, but the family and order relationships of this clade remain uncertain.
S1198	K. A. Seifert;E. S. Hoekstra;J. C. Frisvad;G. Louis-Seize	2004	Penicillium cecidicola, a new species on cynipid insect galls on Quercus pacifica in the western United States	Studies in Mycology	50						A synnematous species of Penicillium subgenus Biverticillium was found growing inside emergence tunnels from insect galls (Cynipidae, Hymenoptera, the so-called gall wasps) on scrub oaks (Quercus pacifica Nixon & C.H. Muller) collected in the western United States. The fungus is characterized by the production of synnemata with white or creamish stipes, biverticillate conidiophores with lanceolate phialides typical of subgenus Biverticillium, and small, ellipsoidal, slightly roughened dark green conidia. In culture, the fungus produces velutinous, dark green colonies, with synnemata produced near the margins of the colonies, particularly in fresh isolates exposed to light after 10 days. The fungus produces the extrolite apiculide A and a series of unidentified metabolites also produced by P. panamense. The oak gall species is described here as Penicillium cecidicola and compared with similar described species. An ITS phylogeny suggests that P. cecidicola is a sister species to P. dendriticum, an Australian species with yellow synnemata that also sometimes occurs on insect galls. Notes are included on several other species of Penicillium that we have isolated from insect galls.
S1142	H. Voglmayr	2004	Spirosphaera cupreorufescens sp. nov., a rare aeroaquatic fungus	Studies in Mycology	49						Spirosphaera cupreorufescens is described as a new aeroaquatic fungus. It inhabits leaves of deciduous trees submerged in small ditches or puddles in slightly minerotrophic bogs and mires. Molecular phylogenetic analyses of partial nLSU and of the ITS1-5.8S-ITS2 rDNA sequences are given to reveal its phylogenetic position. Although it is morphologically clearly attributable to the anamorph genus Spirosphaera, LSU rDNA sequence data show that it is not related to the type species of the genus, Spirosphaera floriformis. Whereas Spirosphaera floriformis is phylogenetically placed within the unitunicate Leotiomycetidae sensu lato, Spirosphaera cupreorufescens is embedded within the bitunicate Dothideomycetes. The genus Spirosphaera in its current circumscription is shown to be polyphyletic; however, lack of morphologically discriminating features prevent generic splitting, and the genus Spirosphaera is maintained as an anamorph form-genus. A key to all described species of Spirosphaera is provided.
S1209	I. Barnes;P. W. Crous;B. D. Wingfield;M. J. Wingfield	2004	Multigene phylogenies reveal that red band needle blight of Pinus is caused by two distinct species of Dothistroma, D. septosporum and D. pini	Studies in Mycology	50	2	551-565				The red band needle blight fungus, Dothistroma septosporum is a widely distributed pathogen of many pine species. Three morphological varieties of this pathogen have been described based on differences in conidial length. However, controversy exists as to whether spore size represents an adequate characteristic to distinguish between forms of D. septosporum. The aim of this investigation was to consider the phylogenetic relationships between D. septosporum isolates from different countries. An additional objective was to determine whether comparisons of DNA sequence data support the morphological varieties recognized for this species. DNA from portions of the nuclear ribosomal internal transcribed spacer (ITS), â-tubulin and elongation factor 1-á genes were sequenced and analysed for isolates from 13 different countries representing five continents. Results show that isolates of the pathogen encompasses two divergent lineages representing distinct phylogenetic species. One phylogenetic species (Lineage I) is found worldwide, while the other (Lineage II), is restricted to the North-Central U.S.A. The names D. pini and D. septosporum are available for these species. The former name should apply to the phylogenetic species currently known only from the United States. The latter fungus has a worldwide distribution and is the causal agent of the serious disease known as red band needle blight that has damaged exotic plantations of Pinus radiata in the Southern Hemisphere. A PCR-restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) diagnostic protocol is described that distinguishes between all the currently known Dothistroma species. The previous classification of D. septosporum isolates into different varieties based on morphology is inconsistent and not supported by our DNA analyses. We therefore reject further use of varietal names in Dothistroma.
S1395	S. Hambleton;N. L. Nickerson;K. A. Seifert	2005	Leohumicola, a new genus of heat-resistant hyphomycetes	Studies in Mycology	53		27-50				The new anamorph genus Leohumicola (hyphomycetes) is described for four species, including three new species isolated after heat treatment of soils collected in Canada. The species produce slow-growing agar colonies that eventually produce lateral or terminal aleurioconidia, with a dark brown terminal cell, and the remains of a paler basal cell that fractures during secession. The genus is compared with Humicola, Trichocladium, Thermomyces, Complexipes and some other morphologically similar genera. Nuclear ribosomal small subunit (SSU) ribosomal DNA sequences demonstrate that Leohumicola is a monophyletic group in the Leotiomycetes, distinct from Humicola and Trichocladium (Sordariales), and Thermomyces (Eurotiales). Internal transcribed spacer sequences (ITS) support our recognition of four species of Leohumicola, each with distinct colony and micromorphological characters. The existence of additional species is probable based on our own ITS sequences and some retrieved from GenBank. The type species L. verrucosa, was recovered from a variety of soil types across Canada, and has sympodially proliferating conidiogenous cells that produce conidia with verrucose terminal cells that measure 4ˆ5.5 x 4ˆ5.5 µm. The SSU of some strains of this species have five long Group I introns that extend the length to more than 3700 nt. Leohumicola lenta produces very slowly growing colonies on agar media and larger conidia than L. verrucosa, and L. terminalis produces only terminal conidia. The latter two species are represented by single strains. The fourth species, L. minima is based on Trichocladium minimum, originally isolated from volcanic ash soil from Chile. ITS sequences suggest that Humicola is a synonym of Trichocladium, a finding that may require conservation of Humicola. Dichotomous keys are provided to the accepted species of Leohumicola, and to morphologically similar aleurioconidial genera.
S1393	S. Hambleton;L. Sigler	2005	Meliniomyces, a new anamorph genus for root-associated fungi with phylogenetic affinities to Rhizoscyphus ericae (&#8801; Hymenoscyphus ericae), Leotiomycetes	Studies in Mycology	53	1	1-26	10.3114/sim.53.1.1			Sterile fungi isolated from surface-sterilized roots of the Ericaceae, and hypothesized to be conspecific based primarily on restriction fragment length polymorphisms, were provisionally named as Variable White Taxon (VWT). In preliminary resynthesis trials with Vaccinium myrtilloides or V. vitis-idaea, isolates did not form typical ericoid mycorrhizas. Additional isolates obtained from roots of the Orchidaceae, Pinaceae, Betulaceae and Salicaceae, and given informal names such as Sterile white 1 (SW1), were thought to represent the same taxon based on cultural similarities. To evaluate conspecificity and infer phylogenetic affinities, partial nuclear ribosomal DNA sequences were determined. Parsimony analyses supported a species level distinction for VWT/SW1 and indicated that the fungus is placed within the species complex referred to as the „Hymenoscyphus ericae aggregate‰ which includes H. ericae (Leotiomycetes), many unnamed taxa and Cadophora finlandica. The new genus and species Melinia variabilis is proposed to accommodate this root-associated fungus to facilitate discussion and information retrieval, and to provide a foundation for additional experimental work. Although isolates are sterile in culture, they can be identified by morphological characters in conjunction with ITS sequence data. The mycorrhizal status of M. variabilis is not yet clear. In prior published results, strains demonstrated no or some colonization with ericoid and ectomycorrhizal hosts but did not form true ectomycorrhizas. ITS analyses indicated that the „H. ericae aggregate‰ includes several other well supported clades putatively named as Melinia species. Representative strains were examined morphologically for two of these species, described as M. vraolstadiae and M. bicolor. Both include ectomycorrhizal mycobionts of the „Piceirhiza bicolorata‰ morphotype. Rhizoscyphus ericae is accepted as the appropriate name for H. ericae.
S1218	G. J. M. Verkley;M. d Silva;D. T. Wicklow;P. W. Crous	2005	Paraconiothyrium, a new genus to accommodate the mycoparasite Coniothyrium minitans, anamorphs of Paraphaeosphaeria, and four new species	Studies in Mycology	50						Coniothyrium-like coelomycetes are drawing attention as biological control agents, potential bioremediators, and producers of antibiotics. Four genera are currently used to classify such anamorphs, namely, Coniothyrium, Microsphaeropsis, Cyclothyrium, and Cytoplea. The morphological plasticity of these fungi, however, makes it difficult to ascertain their best generic disposition in many cases. A new genus, Paraconiothyrium is here proposed to accommodate four new species, P. estuarinum, P. brasiliense, P. cyclothyrioides, and P. fungicolum. Their formal descriptions are based on anamorphic characters as seen in vitro. The teleomorphs of these species are unknown, but maximum parsimony analysis of ITS and partial SSU nrDNA sequences showed that they belong in the Pleosporales and group in a clade including Paraphaeosphaeria s. str., the biocontrol agent Coniothyrium minitans, and the ubiquitous soil fungus Coniothyrium sporulosum. Coniothyrium minitans and C. sporulosum are therefore also combined into the genus Paraconiothyrium. The anamorphs of Paraphaeosphaeria michotii and Paraphaeosphaeria pilleata are regarded representative of Paraconiothyrium, but remain formally unnamed. Paraconiothyrium species are phylogenetically distant from typical members of the other coelomycete genera mentioned above.
S1509	P. W. Crous;J. Z. Groenewald;M. Groenewald;P. Caldwell;U. Braun;T. C. Harrington	2006	Species of Cercospora associated with grey leaf spot of maize	Studies in Mycology							Grey leaf spot is a serious yield-reducing disease of maize (Zea mays) in many parts of the world where this crop is cultivated. The causal organism associated with the disease is Cercospora zeae-maydis. Two potential sibling species have been recognized as Groups I and II. The DNA sequences for the internal transcribed spacers (ITS1 & ITS2), the 5.8S rRNA gene, elongation factor 1-a, histone H3, actin and calmodulin gene regions suggest that Groups I and II are two distinct species. Furthermore, Cercospora zeae-maydis (Group I) can be distinguished from C. zeina sp. nov. (Group II) by its faster growth rate on artificial media, the ability to produce cercosporin, longer conidiophores, and broadly fusiform conidia. A PCR-based test that distinguishes the two species was developed using species-specific primers designed from the histone H3 gene.
S1508	P. W. Crous;J. Z. Groenewald;J. M. Risede;P. Simoneau;K. D. Hyde	2006	Calonectria species and their Cylindrocladium anamorphs: species with clavate vesicles	Studies in Mycology							The present study compares all known species of Cylindrocladium that have clavate vesicles. Several isolates were baited from soils collected in various parts of the world, while others were associated with leaf litter or symptomatic plant hosts. Isolates were compared based on morphology, as well as DNA sequence data from their b-tubulin and histone gene H3 regions. Two species, Cy. australiense and Cy. ecuadoriae, are newly described based on morphology and molecular data. The Cylindrocladium species associated with toppling disease of banana is identified as Cy. flexuosum. An epitype is designated for Cy. ilicicola, and a new name, Curvicladiella, proposed for the mitosporic genus Curvicladium, as the latter name is already occupied.
S1507	P. W. Crous;M. M. Liebenberg;U. Braun;J. Z. Groenewald	2006	Re-evaluating the taxonomic status of Phaeoisariopsis griseola, the causal agent of angular leaf spot of bean	Studies in Mycology							Angular leaf spot of Phaseolus vulgaris is a serious disease caused by Phaeoisariopsis griseola, in which two gene pools are known, namely Andean and the Middle-American one. Sequence analysis of the SSU region of nrDNA, revealed the genus Phaeoisariopsis to be indistinguishable from other hyphomycete anamorph genera of Mycosphaerella, namely Pseudocercospora and Stigmina. A new combination is therefore proposed in the genus Pseudocercospora, a name to be conserved over Phaeoisariopsis and Stigmina. Further comparisons by means of morphology, cultural characteristics, and DNA sequence analysis of the ITS, calmodulin, and actin gene regions delineated two groups within P. griseola, which are recognised as two formae, namely f. griseola and f. mesoamericana.
S1505	P. W. Crous;B. Slippers;M. J. Wingfield;J. Rheeder;W. F. O. Marasas;A. J. L. Phillips;A. Alves;T. Burgess;P. Barber;J. Z. Groenewald	2006	Phylogenetic lineages in the Botryosphaeriaceae	Studies in Mycology							Botryosphaeria is a species-rich genus with a cosmopolitan distribution, commonly associated with dieback and cankers of woody plants. As many as 18 anamorph genera have been associated with Botryosphaeria, most of which have been reduced to synonymy under Diplodia (conidia mostly ovoid, pigmented, thick-walled), or Fusicoccum (conidia mostly fusoid, hyaline, thin-walled). However, there are numerous conidial anamorphs having morphological characteristics intermediate between Diplodia and Fusicoccum, and there are several records of species outside the Botryosphaeriaceae that have anamorphs typical of Botryosphaeria s.str. Recent studies have also linked Botryosphaeria to species with pigmented, septate ascospores, and Dothiorella anamorphs, or Fusicoccum anamorphs with Dichomera synanamorphs. The aim of this study was to employ DNA sequence data of the 28S rDNA to resolve apparent lineages within the Botryosphaeriaceae. From these data, 12 clades were recognised. Two of these lineages clustered outside the Botryosphaeriaceae, namely Diplodia-like anamorphs occurring on maize, which are best accommodated in Stenocarpella (Diaporthales), as well as an unresolved clade including species of Camarosporium/Microdiplodia. We recognise 10 lineages within the Botryosphaeriaceae. These include an unresolved clade (Diplodia/Lasiodiplodia/Tiarosporella), Botryosphaeria s.str. (Fusicoccum anamorph), Macrophomina, Neoscytalidium gen. nov., Dothidotthia (Dothiorella anamorph), Neofusicoccum gen. nov. (Botryosphaeria-like teleomorph, Dichomera-like synanamorph), Pseudofusicoccum gen. nov., Saccharata (Fusicoccum- and Diplodia-like synanamorphs), „Botryosphaeria‰ quercuum (Diplodia-like anamorph), and Guignardia (Phyllosticta). Separate teleomorph and anamorph names are not provided for newly introduced genera, even where both morphs are known. The taxonomy of some clades and isolates (e.g. B. mamane) remains unresolved due to the absence of ex-type cultures.
S1559	P. W. Crous;M. J. Wingfield;J. P. Mansilla;A. C. Alfenas;J. Z. Groenewald	2006	Phylogenetic reassessment of Mycosphaerella spp. and their anamorphs occurring on Eucalyptus. II	Studies in Mycology							Several species of the genus Eucalyptus are planted as exotics for timber and fibre production in the Southern Hemisphere and Asia, and to some extent also in Europe. Species of Mycosphaerella are commonly associated with leaves and twigs of eucalypts, leading to defoliation, dieback, and even death of young plants. In the present study, numerous isolates of Mycosphaerella species were obtained from leaf litter, or living leaves exhibiting leaf spot symptoms, or the more severe Mycosphaerella leaf blotch disease symptoms. Isolates were compared based on DNA sequence data for the internal transcribed spacer region (ITS1 & ITS2) and the 5.8S gene. Based on these data, as well as their cultural characteristics or on three different media, morphology, anamorphs, and ascospore germination patterns, 21 new species are described.
S1490	M. Gryzenhout;H. Myburg;C. S. Hodges;B. D. Wingfield;M. J. Wingfield	2006	Microthia, Holocryphia and Ursicollum, three new genera on Eucalyptus and Coccoloba for fungi previously known as Cryphonectria	Studies in Mycology	55		35-52				Cryphonectria havanensis is a fungus associated with Eucalyptus species in Cuba and Florida (U.S.A.). Until recently, there have been no living cultures of C. havanensis and it has thus not been possible to assess its taxonomic status. Isolates thought to represent this fungus have, however, emerged from surveys of Eucalyptus in Mexico and Hawaii (U.S.A.). Results of this study showed that these isolates represent C. havanensis but reside in a genus distinct from Cryphonectria sensu stricto, which is described here as Microthia. Isolates of an unidentified fungus occurring on Myrica faya in the Azores and Madeira also grouped in Microthia and were identical to other M. havanensis isolates. Cryphonectria coccolobae, a fungus occurring on sea grape (Coccoloba uvifera) in Bermuda and Florida, was found to be morphologically identical to Microthia and is transferred to this genus, but as a distinct species. Surveys for M. coccolobae on sea grape in Florida, yielded a second diaporthalean fungus from this host. This fungus is morphologically and phylogenetically distinct from M. coccolobae and other closely related taxa and is described as Ursicollum fallax gen. et sp. nov. Phylogenetic analyses in this study have also shown that isolates of C. eucalypti, a pathogen of Eucalyptus in South Africa and Australia, group in a clade separate from all other groups including that representing Cryphonectria sensu stricto. This difference is supported by the fact that Cryphonectria eucalypti has ascospore septation different to that of all other Cryphonectria species. A new genus, Holocryphia, is thus erected for C. eucalypti.
S1511	F. Halleen;H. J. Schroers;J. Z. Groenewald;C. Rego;H. Oliveira;P. W. Crous	2006	Neonectria liriodendri sp. nov., the main causal agent of black foot rot of grapevines	Studies in Mycology							Black foot disease is a serious disease of grapevine crops in most areas where vines are grown. Mainly two species of Cylindrocarpon, C. destructans and C. macrodidymum, are associated with this disease. Recent studies have revealed a tremendous molecular variation within the former but only slight molecular variation within the latter, indicating that C. destructans presents a complex of several species The present study elucidates the taxonomic status of C. destructans-like isolates associated with black foot disease of grapevines. Grapevine isolates were studied morphologically, subjected to DNA analyses of their ITS and partial &#946;-tubulin genes, and were mated in all combinations in vitro. Cylindrocarpon destructans strains isolated from grapevines in Europe and South Africa appeared morphologically and genetically identical, and had identical ITS and partial &#946;-tubulin gene sequences. Phylogenetic analyses placed these strains in a clade closely related but clearly distinct from other clades with C. destructans-like anamorphs obtained from various herbaceous or woody hosts. Only the ex-type strain of Cylindrocarpon liriodendri had identical sequences to strains isolated from grapevines, and could also not be distinguished by morphological characters. The grapevine isolates are therefore reidentified here as Cylindrocarpon liriodendri. Cylindrocarpn liriodendri formed perithecia in heterothallic conditions and the holomorph of this species is described as Neonectria liriodendri sp. nov. Neonectria liriodendri is genetically distinct from the ex-type strain of Neonectria radicicola, which originated from Cyclamen in Sweden. Both ex-type strains also differ from at least two other clades comprising additional C. destructans-like strains. Many of these strains originated from Panax sp., which is the host of the type of C. destructans. Our phylogenetic analyses indicate that C. destructans is not the anamorph of N. radicicola and that N. liriodendri, N. radicicola and several C. destructans-like taxa may have evolved independently within the same phylogenetic species complex.
S1506	J. C. Janse van Rensburg;S. C. Lamprecht;J. Z. Groenewald;L. A. Castlebury;P. W. Crous	2006	Characterisation of Phomopsis spp. associated with die-back of rooibos (Aspalathus linearis) in South Africa	Studies in Mycology							Die-back of rooibos (Aspalathus linearis) causes substantial losses in commercial Aspalathus plantations in South Africa. In the past, the disease has been attributed to Phomopsis phaseoli (teleomorph: Diaporthe phaseolorum). Isolates obtained from diseased plants, however, were highly variable with regard to morphology and pathogenicity. The aim of the present study was thus to identify the Phomopsis species associated with die-back of rooibos. Isolates were subjected to DNA sequence comparisons of the internal transcribed spacer region (ITS1, 5.8S, ITS2) and partial sequences of the elongation factor 1-alpha gene. Furthermore, species were also compared in glasshouse inoculation trials on 8-mo-old potted plants to evaluate their pathogenicity. Five species were identified, of which D. aspalathus (formerly identified as D. phaseolorum, or D. phaseolorum var. meridionalis) proved to be the most virulent, followed by D. ambigua, Phomopsis theicola, a species of Libertella and Phomopsis, respectively, and a newly described species, P. cuppatea. A description is also provided for D. ambigua based on a newly designated epitype specimen.
S1442	S. Lee;P. W. Crous;M. J. Wingfield	2006	Pestalotioid fungi from Restionaceae in the Cape Floral Kingdom	Studies in Mycology	52						Eight pestalotioid fungi were isolated from the Restionaceae growing in the Cape Floral Kingdom of South Africa. Sarcostroma restionis, Truncatella megaspora, T. restionacearum and T. spadicea are newly described. New records include Pestalotiopsis matildae, Sarcostroma lomatiae, Truncatella betulae and T. hartigii. To resolve generic affiliations, phylogenetic analyses were performed on ITS (ITS1, 5.8S, ITS2) and part of 28S rDNA. DNA data support the original generic concept of Truncatella, which encompases Pestalotiopsis species having 3-septate conidia. The genus Sarcostroma is retained as separate from Seimatosporium.
S1474	W. Maier;T. Khoza;N. Harmse;B. D. Wingfield;M. J. Wingfield	2006	A disease epidemic on Zizyphus mucronata in the Kruger National Park caused by Coniodictyum chevalieri	Studies in Mycology							This study records a severe outbreak of a disease on Zizyphus mucronata (Rhamnaceae) in Greater Kruger National Park, South Africa. The causal agent of the disease was found to be Coniodictyum chevalieri, a fungus previously believed to be very rare. Detailed illustrations of the symptoms and fungus are presented in order to facilitate future studies. The known geographical distribution of Coniodictyum is presented in relation to the distribution of its host, and a short review of its systematic history is also given. This also treats an invalidly published species name in South Africa, which has confused the literature. A DNA based phylogeny is presented for the pathogen and this reflects the unique nature of its geographical distribution and biology.
S1479	L. Mostert;J. Z. Groenewald;R. C. Summerbell;W. Gams;P. W. Crous	2006	Taxonomy and pathology of Togninia (Diaporthales) and its Phaeoacremonium anamorphs	Studies in Mycology	54						The genus Togninia (Diaporthales, Togniniaceae) is here monographed along with its Phaeoacremonium (Pm.) anamorphs. Ten species of Togninia and 22 species of Phaeoacremonium are treated. Several new species of Togninia (T.) are described, namely T. argentinensis (anamorph Pm. argentinense), T. austroafricana (anamorph Pm. austroafricanum), T. krajdenii, T. parasitica and T. rubrigena. New species of Phaeoacremonium include Pm. novae-zealandiae (teleomorph Togninia novae-zealandiae), Pm. iranianum, Pm. sphinctrophorum and Pm. theobromatis. Species can be identified based on their cultural and morphological characters, supported by DNA data derived from partial sequences of the actin and â-tubulin genes. Phylogenies of the SSU and LSU rRNA genes were used to determine whether Togninia has more affinity with the Calosphaeriales or the Diaporthales. The results confirmed that Togninia had a higher affinity to the Diaporthales than the Calosphaeriales. Examination of type specimens revealed that T. cornicola, T. vasculosa, T. rhododendri, T. minima var. timidula and T. villosa, were not members of Togninia. The new combinations Calosphaeria cornicola, Calosphaeria rhododendri, Calosphaeria transversa, Calosphaeria tumidula, Calosphaeria vasculosa and Jattaea villosa are proposed. Species of Phaeoacremonium are known vascular plant pathogens causing wilting and dieback of woody plants. The most prominent diseases in which they are involved are Petri disease and esca, which occur on grapevines and are caused by a complex of fungi, often including multiple species of Phaeoacremonium. Various Phaeoacremonium species are opportunistic fungi on humans and cause phaeohyphomycosis. The correct and rapid identification of Phaeoacremonium species is important to facilitate the understanding of their involvement in plant as well as human disease. A rapid identification method was developed for the 22 species of Phaeacremonium. It involved the use of 23 species-specific primers, including 20 primers targeting the betatubulin gene and three targeting the actin gene. These primers can be used in 14 multiplex reactions. Additionally, a multiple-entry electronic key based on morphological, cultural and betatubulin sequence data was developed to facilitate phenotypic and sequence-based species identification of the different Phaeoacremonium species. Separate dichotomous keys are provided for the identification of the Togninia and Phaeoacremonium species. Keys for the identification of Phaeoacremonium-like fungi and the genera related to Togninia are also provided. The mating strategy of several Togninia species was investigated with ascospores obtained from fertile perithecia produced in vitro. Togninia argentinensis and T. novae-zealandiae have homothallic mating systems, whereas T. austroafricana, T. krajdenii, T. minima, T. parasitica, T. rubrigena and T. viticola were heterothallic.
S1488	G. Nakabonge;M. Gryzenhout;J. Roux;B. D. Wingfield;M. J. Wingfield	2006	Celoporthe dispersa gen. et sp. nov. from native Myrtales in South Africa	Studies in Mycology	98		239-249				In a survey for Cryphonectria and Chrysoporthe species on Myrtales in South Africa, a fungus resembling the stem canker pathogen Chrysoporthe austroafricana was collected from native Syzygium cordatum near Tzaneen (Limpopo Province), Heteropyxis canescens near Lydenburg (Mpumalanga Province) and exotic Tibouchina granulosa in Durban (KwaZulu-Natal Province). The fungus was associated with dying branches and stems on S. cordatum, H. canescens and T. granulosa. However, morphological differences were detected between the unknown fungus from these three hosts and known species of Chrysoporthe. The aim of this study was to characterise the fungus using DNA sequence comparisons and morphological features. Pathogenicity tests were also conducted to assess its virulence on Eucalyptus (ZG 14 clones), H. natalensis and T. granulosa. Plants of H. canescens were not available for inoculation. Results showed distinct morphological differences between the unknown fungus and Chrysoporthe spp. Phylogenetic analysis showed that isolates reside in a clade separate from Chrysoporthe and other related genera. Celoporthe dispersa gen. et sp. nov. is, therefore, described to accommodate this fungus. Pathogenicity tests showed that C. dispersa is not pathogenic to H. natalensis, but that it is a potential pathogen of Eucalyptus and Tibouchina spp.
S1412	D. Pavlic;B. Slippers;T. A. Coutinho;M. J. Wingfield	2006	Identification of Botryosphaeria spp. from native Syzygium cordatum in South Africa	Studies in Mycology							Botryosphaeria spp. are widely distributed canker and die-back pathogens occurring on many forest tree species, including Eucalyptus (Myrtaceae). These fungi have recently been reported from native South African Myrtaceae, such as Syzygium cordatum and Heteropyxis natalensis. This finding initiated a survey of botryosphaeriaceous fungi from S. cordatum, which is the most common myrtaceous tree species in South Africa. Botryosphaeria strains were isolated from dying and asymptomatic twigs and leaves of S. cordatum from different geographical regions in South Africa. All isolates were induced to sporulate in culture and separated into eight groups based on conidial morphology. To facilitate their identification, representative isolates from these groups were compared with known Botryosphaeria spp. based on ITS rDNA sequence data. Phylogenetic analysis distinguished seven clades for the isolates obtained from S. cordatum. The ITS rDNA sequence data did not separate isolates of the cryptic species B. parva and B. ribis. These species could also not be distinguished confidently based on morphological data. A PCR-RFLP fingerprinting technique was, therefore, used to distinguish between isolates of these two species. From these data, eight Botryosphaeria spp. were identified including B. parva, B. ribis, B. lutea, B. australis, B. rhodina, B. dothidea, Fusicoccum mangiferum and Lasiodiplodia gonubiensis. Botryosphaeria ribis, B. parva and F. mangiferum were the most abundant species while only one isolate represented B. dothidea. The most abundant species on Syzygium are the same as those occurring on Eucalyptus and Mango trees in South Africa. It is clearly important for management programs to consider the potential impact of pathogens, such as Botryosphaeria, that can cross-infect native and introduced tree species.
S1877	A. Arzanlou;J. Z. Groenewald;W. Gams;U. Braun;P. W. Crous	2007	Phylogenetic and morphotaxonomic revision of Ramichloridium and allied genera	Studies in Mycology	58		57-93				The phylogeny of the genera Periconiella, Ramichloridium, Rhinocladiella and Veronaea was explored by means of partial sequences of the 28S (LSU) rRNAgene and the ITS region (ITS1, 5.8S rDNA and ITS2). Based on the LSU sequence data, ramichloridium-like species segregate into eight distinct clusters. These include theCapnodiales (Mycosphaerellaceae and Teratosphaeriaceae), the Chaetothyriales (Herpotrichiellaceae), the Pleosporales, and five ascomycete clades with uncertain affinities.The type species of Ramichloridium, R. apiculatum, together with R. musae, R. biverticillatum, R. cerophilum, R. verrucosum, R. pini, and three new species isolated fromStrelitzia, Musa and forest soil, respectively, reside in the Capnodiales clade. The human-pathogenic species R. mackenziei and R. basitonum, together with R. fasciculatumand R. anceps, cluster with Rhinocladiella (type species: Rh. atrovirens, Herpotrichiellaceae, Chaetothyriales), and are allocated to this genus. Veronaea botryosa, the typespecies of the genus Veronaea, also resides in the Chaetothyriales clade, whereas Veronaea simplex clusters as a sister taxon to the Venturiaceae (Pleosporales), and is placedin a new genus, Veronaeopsis. Ramichloridium obovoideum clusters with Carpoligna pleurothecii (anamorph: Pleurothecium sp., Chaetosphaeriales), and a new combinationis proposed in Pleurothecium. Other ramichloridium-like clades include R. subulatum and R. epichloës (incertae sedis, Sordariomycetes), for which a new genus, Radulidiumis erected. Ramichloridium schulzeri and its varieties are placed in a new genus, Myrmecridium (incertae sedis, Sordariomycetes). The genus Pseudovirgaria (incertae sedis)is introduced to accommodate ramichloridium-like isolates occurring on various species of rust fungi. A veronaea-like isolate from Bertia moriformis with phylogenetic affinity tothe Annulatascaceae (Sordariomycetidae) is placed in a new genus, Rhodoveronaea. Besides Ramichloridium, Periconiella is also polyphyletic. Thysanorea is introduced toaccommodate Periconiella papuana (Herpotrichiellaceae), which is unrelated to the type species, P. velutina (Mycosphaerellaceae).
S1871	P. W. Crous;U. Braun;J. Z. Groenewald	2007	Mycosphaerella is polyphyletic	Studies in Mycology	58	1	1-32	10.3114/sim.2007.58.01			Mycosphaerella, one of the largest genera of ascomycetes, encompasses several thousand species and has anamorphs residing in more than 30 form genera.Although previous phylogenetic studies based on the ITS rDNA locus supported the monophyly of the genus, DNA sequence data derived from the LSU gene distinguish severalclades and families in what has hitherto been considered to represent the Mycosphaerellaceae. Several important leaf spotting and extremotolerant species need to be disposedto the genus Teratosphaeria, for which a new family, the Teratosphaeriaceae, is introduced. Other distinct clades represent the Schizothyriaceae, Davidiellaceae, Capnodiaceae,and the Mycosphaerellaceae. Within the two major clades, namely Teratosphaeriaceae and Mycosphaerellaceae, most anamorph genera are polyphyletic, and new anamorphconcepts need to be derived to cope with dual nomenclature within the Mycosphaerella complex.
S1875	P. W. Crous;U. Braun;K. Schubert;J. Z. Groenewald	2007	Delimiting Cladosporium from morphologically similar genera	Studies in Mycology	58		33-56				The genus Cladosporium is restricted to dematiaceous hyphomycetes with a coronate scar type, and Davidiella teleomorphs. In the present study numerouscladosporium-like taxa are treated, and allocated to different genera based on their morphology and DNA phylogeny derived from the LSU nrRNA gene. Several species areintroduced in new genera such as Hyalodendriella, Ochrocladosporium, Rachicladosporium, Rhizocladosporium, Toxicocladosporium and Verrucocladosporium. A further newtaxon is described in Devriesia (Teratosphaeriaceae). Furthermore, Cladosporium castellanii, the etiological agent of tinea nigra in humans, is confirmed as synonym of Stenellaaraguata, while the type species of Stenella is shown to be linked to the Teratosphaeriaceae (Capnodiales), and not the Mycosphaerellaceae as formerly presumed.
S1876	P. W. Crous;K. Schubert;U. Braun;G. S. d Hoog;A. D. Hocking;H. D. Shin;J. Z. Groenewald	2007	Opportunistic, human-pathogenic species in the Herpotrichiellaceae are phenotypically similar to saprobic or phytopathogenic species in the Venturiaceae	Studies in Mycology	58		185-217				Although morphologically similar, species of Cladophialophora (Herpotrichiellaceae) were shown to be phylogenetically distinct from Pseudocladosporium(Venturiaceae), which was revealed to be synonymous with the older genus, Fusicladium. Other than being associated with human disorders, species of Cladophialophorawere found to also be phytopathogenic, or to occur as saprobes on organic material, or in water, fruit juices, or sports drinks, along with species of Exophiala. Caproventuriaand Metacoleroa were confirmed to be synonyms of Venturia, which has Fusicladium (= Pseudocladosporium) anamorphs. Apiosporina, based on A. collinsii, clusteredbasal to the Venturia clade, and appears to represent a further synonym. Several species with a pseudocladosporium-like morphology in vitro represent a sister clade to theVenturia clade, and are unrelated to Polyscytalum. These taxa are newly described in Fusicladium, which is morphologically close to Anungitea, a heterogeneous genus withunknown phylogenetic affinity. In contrast to the Herpotrichiellaceae, which were shown to produce numerous synanamorphs in culture, species of the Venturiaceae weremorphologically and phylogenetically more uniform. Several new species and new combinations were introduced in Cladophialophora, Cyphellophora (Herpotrichiellaceae),Exophiala, Fusicladium, Venturia (Venturiaceae), and Cylindrosympodium (incertae sedis).
S1872	K. Schubert;U. Braun;J. Z. Groenewald;P. W. Crous	2007	Cladosporium leaf-blotch and stem rot of Paeonia spp. caused by Dichocladosporium chlorocephalum gen. nov	Studies in Mycology	58		95-104				Cladosporium chlorocephalum (= C. paeoniae) is a common, widespread leaf-spotting hyphomycete of peony (Paeonia spp.), characterised by having dimorphicconidiophores. During the season, one stage of this fungus causes distinct, necrotic leaf-blotch symptoms on living leaves of Paeonia spp. In late autumn, winter or afteroverwintering, a second morphologically distinct conidiophore type occurs on dead, blackish, rotting stems. Conspecificity of the two morphs, previously proposed on the basisof observations in culture, was supported by DNA sequence data from the ITS and LSU gene regions, using cultures obtained from leaf-blotch symptoms on living leaves, aswell as from dead stems of Paeonia spp. Sequence data were identical, indicating a single species with two morphs. On account of its distinct conidiogenous loci and conidialhila, as well as its sequence-based phylogenetic position separate from the Davidiella/Cladosporium clade, the peony fungus has to be excluded from Cladosporium s. str., butstill belongs to the Davidiellaceae (Capnodiales). The leaf-blotching (cladosporioid) morph of this fungus morphologically resembles species of Fusicladium, but differs in havingdimorphic fruiting, and is phylogenetically distant from the Venturiaceae. The macronematous (periconioid) morph resembles Metulocladosporiella (Chaetothyriales), but lacksrhizoid conidiophore hyphae, and has 0ˆ5-septate conidia. Hence, C. chlorocephalum is assigned to the new genus Dichocladosporium.
S1874	K. Schubert;J. Z. Groenewald;U. Braun;J. Dijksterhuis;M. Starink;C. F. Hill;P. Zalar;G. S. d Hoog;P. W. Crous	2007	Biodiversity in the Cladosporium herbarum complex (Davidiellaceae, Capnodiales), with standardisation of methods for Cladosporium taxonomy and diagnostics	Studies in Mycology	58		105-156				The Cladosporium herbarum complex comprises five species for which Davidiella teleomorphs are known. Cladosporium herbarum s. str. (D. tassiana), C. macrocarpum (D. macrocarpa) and C. bruhnei (D. allicina) are distinguishable by having conidia of different width, and by teleomorph characters. Davidiella variabile is introduced as teleomorph of C. variabile, a homothallic species occurring on Spinacia, and D. macrospora is known to be the teleomorph of C. iridis on Iris spp. The C. herbarum complex combines low molecular distance with a high degree of clonal or inbreeding diversity. Entities differ from each other by multilocus sequence data and by phenetic differences, and thus can be interpreted to represent individual taxa. Isolates of the C. herbarum complex that were formerly associated with opportunistic human infections, cluster with C. bruhnei. Several species are newly described from hypersaline water, namely C. ramotenellum, C. tenellum, C. subinflatum, and C. herbaroides. Cladosporium pseudiridis collected from Iris sp. in New Zealand, is also a member of this species complex and shown to be distinct from C. iridis that occurs on this host elsewhere in the world. A further new species from New Zealand is C. sinuosum on Fuchsia excorticata. Cladosporium antarcticum is newly described from a lichen, Caloplaca regalis, collected in Antarctica, and C. subtilissimum from grape berries in the U.S.A., while the new combination C. ossifragi, the oldest valid name of the Cladosporium known from Narthecium in Europe, is proposed. Standard protocols and media are herewith proposed to facilitate future morphological examination of Cladosporium spp. in culture, and neotypes or epitypes are proposed for all species treated.
S2425	W. M. Jaklitsch	2009	European species of Hypocrea Part I	Studies in Mycology	63	1	1-91	10.3114/sim.2009.63.01			At present 75 species of Hypocrea have been identified in temperate Europe. Nineteen species of green-spored species and their Trichoderma asexual states are here described in detail. Extensive searches for Hypocrea teleomorphs in fourteen European countries, with emphasis on Central Europe, yielded more than 620 specimens within five years. The morphology of fresh and dry stromata was studied. In addition, available types of species described from Europe were examined. Cultures were prepared from ascospores and used to study the morphology of cultures and anamorphs, to determine growth rates, and to extract DNA that was used for amplification and sequencing of three genetic markers. ITS was used for identification, while RNA polymerase II subunit b (rpb2) and translation elongation factor 1 alpha (tef1) were analyzed for phylogenetic reconstruction of the genus. Several unexpected findings resulted from this project: 1) The previous view that only a small number of Trichoderma species form a teleomorph is erroneous. 2) All expectations concerning the number of species in Europe are by far exceeded. Seventy-five species of Hypocrea, two species of Protocrea, and Arachnocrea stipata, are herein identified in temperate Europe, based on the ITS identification routine using fresh material, on species described earlier without molecular data and on species recently described but not collected during this project. 3) Current data suggest that the biodiversity of Hypocrea / Trichoderma above soil exceeds the number of species isolated from soil. 4) The number of Trichoderma species forming hyaline conidia has been considered a small fraction. In Europe, 26 species of those forming teleomorphs produce hyaline conidia, while 42 green-conidial species are known. Three of the detected Hypocrea species do not form an anamorph in culture, while the anamorph is unknown in four species, because they have never been cultured. This work is a preliminary account of Hypocrea and their Trichoderma anamorphs in Europe. Of the hyaline-spored species, H. minutispora is by far the most common species in Europe, of the green-spored species this is H. strictipilosa. General ecology of Hypocrea is discussed. Specific associations, either with host fungi or trees have been found, but the majority of species seems to be necrotrophic on diverse fungi on wood and bark. The taxonomy of the genus will be treated in two parts. In this first part nineteen species of Hypocrea with green ascospores, including six new teleomorph and five new anamorph species, are described in detail. All green-spored species belong to previously recognized clades, except H. spinulosa, which forms the new Spinulosa Clade with two additional new species, and H. fomiticola, which belongs to the Semiorbis Clade and forms effuse to large subpulvinate stromata on Fomes fomentarius, a trait new for species with green ascospores. Anamorph names are established prospectively in order to provide a basis for possible policy alterations towards their use for holomorphs.
S2505	K. Tanaka;K. Hirayama;H. Yonezawa;S. Hatakeyama;Y. Harada;T. Sano;T. Shirouzu;T. Hosoya	2009	Molecular taxonomy of bambusicolous fungi: Tetraplosphaeriaceae, a new pleosporalean family with Tetraploa-like anamorphs	Studies in Mycology	64		175-209	10.3114/sim.2009.64.10			A new family Tetraplosphaeriaceae is described.
S613	D. F. Farr;L. A. Castlebury;A. Y. Rossman;O. Erincik	2001	Greeneria uvicola, cause of bitter rot of grapes, belongs in the Diaporthales	Sydowia	53	2	185-199				Bitter rot of grapes, a cosmopolitan disease, is caused by Greeneria uvicola, an asexually reproducing fungus with no known sexual state. Based on molecular sequence data, specifically the large subunit of the nuclear ribosomal DNA, it was determined that G. uvicola is a member of the Diaporthales. Greeneria uvicola is re-described and illustrated based on two recent collections and comparison with the type specimen. Data are also presented that suggests the family Magnaporthaceae, including Magnaporthe grisea (anamorph: Pyricularia grisea) and Gaeumannomyces graminis, plant pathogens of wheat, rice and other grass crops, should be excluded from the Diaporthales.
S632	L. Mostert;J. C. Kang;P. W. Crous;S. Denman	2001	Phomopsis saccharata sp. nov., causing a canker and die-back disease of Protea repens in South Africa	Sydowia	53	1					Phomopsis saccharata is newly described from cankers of Protea repens plants collected on Jonkershoek Mountain in Stellenbosch, South Africa. Although the pathogenicity of this species was established in a previous study, the fungus has never been formally described. Morphologically this species is easily distinguished from others in the genus based on its large, chiefly 1-septate alpha conidia. Although this is an unusual feature for Phomopsis, ITS DNA sequence data indicate, however, that this taxon is best accommodated in Phomopsis. This finding also suggests that the generic concept of Phomopsis should be expanded to include taxa with 1-septate alpha conidia.
S778	P. W. Crous;J. Z. Groenewald;C. F. Hill	2002	Cylindrocladium pseudonaviculatum sp. nov. from New Zealand, and new Cylindrocladium records from Vietnam	Sydowia	54		23-33				Cylindrocladium pseudonaviculatum is newly described from leaf spots of Buxus sempervirens collected in New Zealand. This species resembles Cy. naviculatum, but is distinct in having longer and wider conidia. Sequence data derived from the beta-tubulin gene also support Cy. pseudonaviculatum as being distinct from the taxa presently acknowledged in Cylindrocladium. No Calonectria teleomorph was observed in culture, and mating studies proved unsuccessful. Cy. insulare and Cy. pauciramosum are also recorded for the first time from Vietnam, where they are associated with leaf spot symptoms on Eucalyptus spp.
S911	P. W. Crous;J. Z. Groenewald;M. J. Wingfield;A. Aptroot	2003	The value of ascospore septation in separating Mycosphaerella from Sphaerulina in the Dothideales: a Saccardoan myth?	Sydowia							Ascospore septation was used by Saccardo as a primary character to separate genera in the Dothideales (Ascomycetes). The genus Sphaerulina (3- to multi-septate ascospores) was thus distinguished from Mycosphaerella (1-septate ascospores). Several species in Sphaerulina have been found to have anamorphs commonly associated with Mycosphaerella. Sequence data derived from the rDNA (ITS 1, 5.8S and ITS 2) gene suggest that Sphaerulina is heterogeneous, and that species with Mycosphaerella-like anamorphs belong in Mycosphaerella, while those with yeast-like anamorphs belong to the Dothioraceae. Mycosphaerella sphaerulinae and its Pseudocercospora sphaerulinae anamorph are newly described from leaf spots of Eucalyptus globulus and E. nitens in Chile. Sphaerulina eucalypti, which occurs on Eucalyptus leaves in South Africa, is transferred to Sydowia. This species is also newly linked to its anamorph, Selenophoma eucalypti. This study contributes to growing phylogenetic evidence that ascospore septation is a poor indicator of generic status in the Ascomycetes.
S1215	M. V. Sogonov;L. A. Castlebury;A. Y. Rossman;D. F. Farr;J. F. White	2005	The type species of the genus Gnomonia, G. gnomon, and the closely related G. setacea	Sydowia							Species of the diaporthalean genus Gnomonia are common yet inconspicuous and poorly known microfungi occurring mostly on overwintered leaves of trees and shrubs in the temperate zone of the northern hemisphere. Confusion exists about the type species of Gnomonia because a type was not designated. Three specific names have been mentioned in the literature as the type species: G. gnomon, G. vulgaris and G. setacea. Gnomonia gnomon was designated as the lectotype species; however, some authors have considered all three taxa to be synonymous with G. setacea having priority. Gnomonia vulgaris is a nomenclatural synonym of G. gnomon. Observations of type specimens and fresh material of G. gnomon and G. setacea reveal that these two species are distinct and can be distinguished by the position of perithecia in the leaf tissue and by ascospore morphology. Descriptions and illustrations of G. gnomon and G. setacea are provided and an epitype specimen with ex-type culture for G. gnomon is designated. Distinction between G. gnomon and G. setacea is also supported by ribosomal DNA sequence analysis.
S1323	D. Vijaykrishna;R. Jeewon;K. D. Hyde	2005	Fusoidispora aquatica: A new ascomycete from Hong Kong based on morphology and phylogeny inferred from rDNA sequences	Sydowia	57	2					During a survey of freshwater ascomycetes in Hong Kong, an interesting ascomycete with fusoid ascospores that had mucilaginous pads at both apices was identified. The affinities of this taxon extend between a wide range of unitunicate ascomycetes (viz. Annulatascaceae, Magaporthaceae, Pleurotremaceae, Trichosphaeriaceae). In order to evaluate its familial placement and generic relatedness with other known ascomycetes, partial DNA sequences derived from the large subunit ribosomal DNA (28S rDNA) were analyzed. Results from the phylogenetic analyses indicate that the family Annulatascaceae is polyphyletic. The unidentified taxon has close affinities with the Annulatascaceae and Ophiostomataceae but does not belong in any existing genera. Thus a new genus, Fusoidispora aquatica, is established to accommodate it.
S2072	K. Tanaka;T. Hosoya	2008	Lophiostoma sagittiforme sp. nov., a new ascomycete (Pleosporales, Dothideomycetes) from Island Yakushima in Japan	Sydowia	60	1	131-145				Lophiostoma sagittiforme sp. nov. was collected from the twigs of Machilus japonica in Island Yakushima, southern Japan. It is characterized by the ascospores with an elongated narrow sheath providing arrowhead-like tips. In terms of sheath morphology of ascospores, L. sagittiforme is similar to some aquatic species of the genus, e.g., L. armatisporum, L. bipolare, L. frondisubmersa, and L. proprietunicatum, but differs form these species in having relatively large-sized ascospores. Phylogenetic analyses based on the internal transcribed region (ITS) -5.8S and partial large subunit of the nuclear ribosomal DNA (LSU nrDNA) also supported the taxonomic classification of L. sagittiforme in Lophiostoma.
S1079	H. T. Lumbsch;A. Mangold;R. Lücking;M. A. García;M. P. Martín	2004	Phylogenetic position of the genera Nadvornikia and Pyrgillus (Ascomycota) based on molecular data	Symbolae Botanicae Upsalienses	34	1	9-17				The phylogeny and systematic placement of the two mazaediate genera Nadvornikia and Pyrgillus was reconstructed using a Bayesian analysis of nuclear LSU rDNA sequences. Partial sequences of 19 species were generated and aligned with 31 sequences retrieved from GenBank. Our results confirm with strong support that Nadvornikia belongs to the Thelotremataceae (Ostropales). The placement of Pyrgillus in the Pyrenulaceae (Pyrenulales) is also strongly supported. The Pyrenulaceae form a strongly supported monophyletic group that is sister to the non-lichenized Chaetothyriales. The Thelotremataceae are a significantly supported monophyletic group with Graphidaceae nested within. The phylogeny within Thelotremataceae is only partially resolved with the single data set.
S983	K. M. Usher;S. Toze;J. Fromont;J. Kuo;D. C. Sutton	2004	A new species of cyanobacterial symbiont from the marine sponge Chondrilla nucula	Symbiosis	36	2	183-192				Partial 16s rDNA sequencing results indicate that the unicellular cyanobacterial symbionts of the sponge species Chondrilla nucula, from the Mediterranean Sea, and C. australiensis, from Australia, are the same, and comprise a unique species. This cyanobacterium belongs to the genus Synechococcus, and occurs in the surface tissues of these sponges, as demonstrated with Fluorescent In Situ Hybridization (FISH) using a species-specific DNA probe, and with Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM). The cyanobacterial symbiont ìAphanocapsa feldmanniiî (Fremy), hosted by the marine sponge Petrosia ficiformis from the Mediterranean Sea, is a separate, but closely related, species also belonging to the genus Synechococcus.
S571	J. C. Kang;P. W. Crous;C. L. Schoch	2001	Species concepts in the Cylindrocladium floridanum and Cy. spathiphylli complexes (Hypocreaceae) based on multi-allelic sequence data, sexual compatibility and morphology System	Systematic and Applied Microbiology	24	2	206-217	10.1078/0723-2020-00026		Calonectria; ITS; β-tubulin; histone sequence analysis; mating studies; systematics	Much attention has recently been devoted to the delimitation of species units in Cylindrocladium (Cy.). In this regard the present study focuses on the taxa within the unresolved Cy. floridanum and Cy. spathiphylli species complexes. Maximum parsimony analyses of DNA sequences of ITS, b-tubulin and histone regions of rRNA genes, and mating experiments revealed a geographically isolated species of Cylindrocladium in the Cy. spathiphylli (teleomorph: Calonectria spathiphylli) species complex. Cy. pseudospathiphylli sp. nov. (teleomorph: Ca. pseudospathiphylli sp. nov.) is described as a new phylogenetic, biological and morphological species. It is distinguished from Cy. spathiphylli by being homothallic, having smaller macroconidia, and distinct DNA sequences of b-tubulin and histone genes. Similarly, parsimony analysis of a combined data set also indicated several phylogenetic species to exist within Cy. floridanum (teleomorph: Ca. kyotensis). Based on differences in vesicle morphology and conidium dimensions, the Canadian population of Cy. floridanum, formerly known as Cy. floridanum Group 2, is described as Cy. canadense sp. nov., while a further collection from Hawaii is described as Cy. pacificum sp. nov.
S316	B. C. Livezey	1996	A phylogenetic analysis of geese and swans (Anseriformes: Anserinae), including selected fossil species	Systematic Biology	45	4	415-450	10.1093/sysbio/45.4.415 		Anseriformes; Anserinae; cladistics; comparative analysis; fossils; geese; morphology; swans; waterfowl	A phylogenetic analysis of modern and selected fossil geese and swans was performed using 165 characters of the skeleton, trachea, and natal and definitive integument. Five shortest trees were found (length = 318; consistency index for informative characters = 0.6341 which differed only in details of relationships among three species of Branta. The trees supported (1) Cnemiornis as sister group to other taxa analyzed; (2) a sister group relationship between the moa-nalos of Hawaii and other geese and swans; (3) Cereopsis as sister group of Anser, Branta, Coscoroba, and Cygnus (contra Livezey, 1986, Auk 103:737-754); (4) monophyly of Anser, Branta, and tGeochen and confirmation of generic monophyly of each; and (5) Coscoroba as sister group to Cygnus. Selechve exclusion of fossil taxa from the analysis variably affected inferred relationships and had substantial impacts on computational efficiency. Some nodes were not robust to boot-strapping: (1) nodes relating species groups within Anser, Cygnus, and tThambetochen and (2) the node uniting Anser, Branta, Coscoroba, and Cygnus relative to Cereopsis. Bremer (decay) indices indicated similar differences in relafive support for nodes. Skeletal characters were comparatively important in establishing higher order relahonships, whereas integumentary characters were crit-ical for lower order inferences. Constrained analyses revealed that other proposed phylogenetic hypotheses entailed variable penalities in parsimony. The shortest tree(s) was considered with respect to selected ecomorphological attributes (e.g., body mass, sexual size dimorphism, clutch size) and biogeography, and a revised phylogenetic classificahon of the geese and swans is pro-posed. 
S320	R. Baker;R. DeSalle	1997	Multiple sources of character information and the phylogeny of Hawaiian Drosophilids	Systematic Biology	46	4	654-673	10.1093/sysbio/46.4.654		Hawaiian Drosophila; partitioned Bremer support; process partitions; simultaneous analysis	Relationships among representatives of the five major Hawaiian Drosophila species groups were examined using data from eight different gene regions. A simultaneous analysis of these data resulted in a single most-parsimonious tree that (1) places the adiastola picture-winged subgroup as sister taxon to the other picture-winged subgroups, (2) unites the modified-tarsus species group with flies from the Antopocerus species group, and (3) places the white-tip scutellum species group as the most basal taxon. Because of the different gene sources used in this study, numerous process partitions can be erected within this data set. We examined the incongruence among these various partitions and the ramifications of these data for the taxonomic consensus, prior agreement, and simultaneous analysis approaches to phylogenetic reconstruction. Separate analyses and taxonomic consensus appear to be inadequate methods for dealing with the partitions in this study. Although detection of incongruence is possible and helps elucidate particular areas of disagreement among data sets, separation of partitions on the basis of incongruence is problematic for many reasons. First, analyzing all genes separately and then either presenting them all as possible hypotheses or taking their consensus provides virtually no information concerning the relationships among these flies. Second, despite some evidence of incongruence, there are no clear delineations among the various gene partitions that separate only heterogeneous data. Third, to the extent that problematic genes can be identified, these genes have nearly the same information content, within a combined analysis framework, as the remaining nonproblematic genes. Our data suggest that significant incongruence among data partitions may be isolated to specific relationships and the false signal creating this incongruence is most likely to be overcome by a simultaneous analysis. We present a new method, partitioned Bremer support, for examining the contribution of a particular data partition to the topological support of the simultaneous analysis tree.
S329	C. A. Brochu	1997	Morphology, fossils, divergence timing, and the phylogenetic relationships of Gavialis	Systematic Biology	46	3	479-522	10.1093/sysbio/46.3.479		Combined data sets; Crocodylia; fossils; molecular clock; parsimony analysis; stratigraphy	Although morphological data have historically favored a basal position for the Indian gharial (Gavialis gangeticus) within Crocodylia and a Mesozoic divergence between Gavialis and all other crocodylians, several recent molecular data sets have argued for a sister-group relationship between Gavialis and the Indonesian false gharial (Tomistoma schlegelii) and a divergence between them no earlier than the Late Tertiary. Fossils were added to a matrix of 164 discrete morphological characters and subjected to parsimony analysis. When morphology was analyzed alone, Gavialis was the sister taxon of all other extant crocodylians whether or not fossil ingroup taxa were included, and a sister-group relationship between Gavialis and Tomistoma was significantly less parsimonious. In combination with published sequence and restriction site fragment data, Gavialis was the sister taxon of all other living crocodylians, but the position of Tomistoma depended on the inclusion of fossil ingroup taxa; with or without fossils, preferred morphological and molecular topologies were not significantly different. Fossils closer to Gavialis than to Tomistoma can be recognized in the Late Cretaceous, and fossil relatives of Tomistoma are known from the basal Eocene, strongly indicating a divergence long before the Late Tertiary. Comparison of minimum divergence time from the fossil record with different measures of molecular distance indicates evolutionary rate heterogeneity within Crocodylia. Fossils strongly contradict a post-Oligocene divergence between Gavialis and any other living crocodylian, but the phylogenetic placement of Gavialis is best viewed as unresolved. 
S327	D. H. A. Fitch	1997	Evolution of male tail development in rhabditid nematodes related to Caenorhabditis elegans	Systematic Biology	46	1	145-179	10.1093/sysbio/46.1.145		Caenorhabditis elegans; character analysis; evolution of development; ontogeny; phylogeny	The evolutionary pathway that has led to male tails of diverse morphology among species of the nematode family Rhabditidae was reconstructed. This family includes the well-studied model species Caenorhabditis elegans. By relating the steps of male tail morphological evolution to the phenotypic changes brought about by developmental mutations induced experimentally in C. elegans, the goal is to identify genes responsible for morphological evolution. The varying morphological characters of the male tails of several rhabditid species have been described previously (Fitch and Emmons, 1995, Dev. Biol. 170:564--582). The developmental events preceding differentiation of the adult structures have also been analyzed; in many cases the origins of varying adult morphological characters were traced to differences during ontogeny. In the present work, the evolutionary changes producing these differences were reconstructed in the context of the four possible phylogenies supported independently by sequences of 18S ribosomal RNA genes (rDNA). Two or more alternative states were defined for 36 developmental and adult morphological characters. These characters alone do not provide sufficient data to resolve most species relationships; however, when combined with the rDNA characters, they provide stronger support for one of the four rDNA phylogenies. Assuming a model of ordered transformations for multistate developmental characters generally results in greater resolution. Transformations between character states can be assigned unequivocally by parsimony to unambiguous branches for most of the characters. Correlations are thereby revealed for some of the developmental characters, indicating a probability of a shared developmental or genetic regulatory pathway. Four of the unequivocal character state changes on unambiguously supported branches closely resemble the phenotypic changes brought about by known mutations in C. elegans. These mutations define genes that are known to act in genetic regulatory hierarchies controlling pattern formation, differentiation, and morphogenesis. Although these studies are still at an early stage, these results strongly suggest that parallel studies of developmental mutants in C. elegans and of morphological and developmental evolution among related nematodes will help define genetic changes underlying the evolution of form. 
S322	M. Friedrich;D. Tautz	1997	Evolution and phylogeny of the Diptera: A molecular phylogenetic analysis using 28S rDNA sequences	Systematic Biology	46	4	674-698	10.1093/sysbio/46.4.674		Character state polarity; Diptera; Drosophila; evolution; maximum likelihood ratio test; molecular phylogeny; ribosomal DNA; systematics	Portions of the large ribosomal subunit RNA gene (28S rDNA) encompassing the D1 and the D7 region were obtained from 16 dipteran species and families to reconstruct early phylogenetic events in the order Diptera. For outgroup comparison, the corresponding sequences were used from representative taxa of the Siphonaptera, Mecoptera, and Lepidoptera. A subset of 488 unambiguously alignable sites was analyzed with respect to important sequence evolution parameters. We found (1) sequence variability is significantly higher in double-stranded sites than in single-stranded sites, (2) transitions are close to saturation in most pairwise sequence comparisons, (3) significant substitution rate heterogeneity exists across sites, and (4) significant substitution rate heterogeneity exists among lineages. Tree reconstruction was carried out with the neighbor joining, maximum parsimony, and maximum likelihood methods. Four major subgroups are consistently and robustly supported: the Brachycera, the Culicomorpha, the Tipulomorpha sensu stricto, and the hitherto controversial Bibionomorpha sensu lato, which includes the families Sciaridae, Mycetophilidae, Cecidomyiidae, Bibionidae, Scatopsidae, and Anisopodidae. The phylogenetic relationships within or among these subclades and the positions of the families Psychodidae and Trichoceridae were not robustly resolved. These results support the view that the mouthparts of extant dipteran larvae evolved from a derived ground state characterized by subdivided and obliquely moving mandibles. Furthermore, sequence divergence and the paleontological record consistently indicate that a period of rapid cladogenesis gave rise to the major dipteran subgroups.
S326	F. M. Lutzoni	1997	Phylogeny of lichen- and non-lichen-forming omphalinoid mushrooms and the utility of testing for combinability among multiple data sets	Systematic Biology	46	3	373-406	10.1093/sysbio/46.3.373		Basidiomycetes; data set combinability; data set homogeneity; fungi, lichen symbiosis; model system; molecular phylogenies; mutualism; nuclear ribosomal DNA; Omphalina; phylogenetic signal	As an initial step toward developing a model system to study requirements for and consequences of transitions to mutualism, the phylogeny of a group of closely related lichenized and nonlichenized basidiomycetes (Omphalina) was reconstructed. The phylogenetic analyses are based on four data sets representing different regions of the nuclear ribosomal repeat unit (ITS1, 5.8S, ITS2, and 25S) obtained from 30 species of Omphalina and related genera. The resulting phylogenetic trees from each of these four data sets, when analyzed separately, were not identical. Testing for the combinability of these four data sets suggested that they could not be combined in their entirety. The removal of ambiguous alignments and saturated sites was sufficient, after reapplying the combinability test on the pruned data sets, to explain the topological discrepancies. In this process, the first of two complementary tests developed by Rodrigo et al. (1993, N.Z. J. Bot. 31:257--268) to assess whether two data sets are the result of the same phylogenetic history was found to be biased, rejecting the combinability of two data sets even when they are samples of the same phylogenetic history. Combining the four pruned data sets yielded phylogenies that suggest the five lichen-forming species of Omphalina form a monophyletic group. The sister group to this symbiotic clade consists mostly of dark brown Omphalina species intermixed with species from the genera Arrhenia and Phaeothellus. The genera Omphalina and Gerronema are shown to be polyphyletic. The lichen-forming species O. ericetorum and the nonmutualistic species O. velutipes, O. epichysium, and O. sphagnicola are the best candidates for experimental work designed to gain a better understanding of mechanisms involved in symbiotic interactions and the role symbiosis has played in the evolution of fungi. 
S324	P. Mardulyn;M. C. Milinkovitch;J. M. Pasteels	1997	Phylogenetic analyses of DNA and allozyme data suggest that Gonioctena leaf beetles (Coleoptera; Chrysomelidae) experienced convergent evolution in their history of host-plant family shifts	Systematic Biology	46	4	722-747	10.1093/sysbio/46.4.722		Allozymes; Chrysomelidae; coevolution; Gonioctena; host-plant shifts; insect-plant interactions; mitochondrial DNA; molecular phylogenetics	A phylogenetic analysis of the genus Gonioctena (Coleoptera, Chrysomelidae) based on allozyme data (17 loci) and mitochondrial DNA sequence data (three gene fragments, 1,391 sites) was performed to study the evolutionary history of host-plant shifts among these leaf beetles. This chrysomelid genus is characteristically associated with a high number of different plant families. The diverse molecular data gathered in this study are to a large extent congruent, and the analyses provide a well-supported phylogenetic hypothesis to address questions about the evolution of host-plant shifts in the genus Gonioctena. The most-parsimonious reconstruction of the ancestral host-plant associations, based on the estimated phylogeny, suggests that the Fabaceae was the ancestral host-plant family of the genus. Although most of the host-plant shifts (between different host species) in Gonioctena have occurred within the same plant family or within the same plant genus, at least eight shifts have occurred between hosts belonging to distantly related and chemically dissimilar plant families. In these cases, host shifts may have been simply directed toward plant species available in the environment. Yet, given that two Gonioctena lineages have independently colonized the same three new plant families, including four of the same new genera, some constraints are likely to have limited the different possibilities of interfamilial host-plant shifts.
S338	J. Sullivan;J. A. Markert;C. W. Kilpatrick	1997	Phylogeography and molecular systematics of the Peromyscus aztecus species group (Rodentia: Muridae) inferred using parsimony and likelihood	Systematic Biology	46	3	426-440	10.1093/sysbio/46.3.426		Cytochrome b; highlands; maximum likelihood; Middle America; parsimony; Peromyscus; phylogeography; vicariance	Mice of the Peromyscus aztecus species group occur at mid to high elevations in several mountain ranges in the highlands of Middle America (Mexico and Central America), a region of high endemicity. We examined the biogeography of this group by conducting phylogenetic analyses of 668 bp of the mitochondrial cytochrome b (cyt b) gene. Phylogenetic analyses under both parsimony and likelihood frameworks produced the same topologies, but estimates of nodal support were artificially high in weighted parsimony analyses. This difference is attributed to the inability of parsimony to optimize branch lengths when evaluating topologies. These data indicate that the P. aztecus-like populations from south and east of the Isthmus of Tehuantepec currently assigned to P. a. oaxacensis represent a distinct species, with genetic distances as high as 0.091. In addition, P. hylocetes is strongly divergent from Mexican populations of P. aztecus (genetic distances of 0.044--0.069), supporting the recognition of this taxon as a distinct species. The history of divergence in this group can be explained by a series of apparently early to middle Pleistocene vicariance events associated with glacial cycles. The Sierra Madre Occidental and Cordillera Transvolcanica each appear to be faunistically isolated, the Isthmus of Tehuantepec appears to have been a strong Pleistocene barrier, and the Sierra Madre Oriental has affinities with the Sierra Madre del Sur and the highlands of central Oaxaca. 
S321	R. K. Wayne;E. Geffen;D. J. Girman;K. P. Koepfli;L. M. Lau;C. R. Marshall	1997	Molecular systematics of the Canidae	Systematic Biology	46	4	622-653	10.1093/sysbio/46.4.622		Canidae; combined analysis; mtDNA; phylogeny; South America; trenchant heel	Despite numerous systematic studies, the relationships among many species within the dog family, Canidae, remain unresolved. Two problems of broad evolutionary significance are the origins of the taxonomically rich canid fauna of South America and the development in three species of the trenchant heel, a unique meat-cutting blade on the lower first molar. The first problem is of interest because the fossil record provides little evidence for the origins of divergent South American species such as the maned wolf and the bush dog. The second issue is problematic because the trenchant heel, although complex in form, may have evolved independently to assist in the processing of meat. We attempted to resolve these two issues and five other specific taxonomic controversies by phylogenetic analysis of 2,001 base pairs of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) sequence data from 23 canid species. The mtDNA tree topology, coupled with data from the fossil record, and estimates of rates of DNA sequence divergence suggest at least three and possibly four North American invasions of South America. This result implies that an important chapter in the evolution of modern canids remains to be discovered in the fossil record and that the South American canid endemism is as much the result of extinction outside of South America as it is due to speciation within South America. The origin of the trenchant heel is not well resolved by our data, although the maximum parsimony tree is weakly consistent with a single origin followed by multiple losses of the character in several extant species. A combined analysis of the mtDNA data and published morphological data provides unexpected support for a monophyletic South American canid clade. However, the homogeneity partition tests indicate significant heterogeneity between the two data sets.
S325	M. F. Whiting;J. C. Carpenter;Q. D. Wheeler;W. C. Wheeler	1997	The strepsiptera problem: phylogeny of the holometabolous insect orders inferred from 18S and 28S ribosomal DNA sequences and morphology	Systematic Biology	46	1	1-68	10.1093/sysbio/46.1.1		Alignment; insect orders; molecular systematics; phylogeny; sensitivity analysis; Strepsiptera; taxon sampling	Phylogenetic relationships among the holometabolous insect orders were inferred from cladistic analysis of nucleotide sequences of 18S ribosomal DNA (rDNA) (85 exemplars) and 28S rDNA (52 exemplars) and morphological characters. Exemplar outgroup taxa were Collembola (1 sequence), Archaeognatha (1), Ephemerida (1), Odonata (2), Plecoptera (2), Blattodea (1), Mantodea (1), Dermaptera (1), Orthoptera (1), Phasmatodea (1), Embioptera (1), Psocoptera (1), Phthiraptera (1), Hemiptera (4), and Thysanoptera (1). Exemplar ingroup taxa were Coleoptera: Archostemata (1), Adephaga (2), and Polyphaga (7); Megaloptera (1); Raphidioptera (1); Neuroptera (sensu stricto ;eq Planipennia): Mantispoidea (2), Hemerobioidea (2), and Myrmeleontoidea (2); Hymenoptera: Symphyta (4) and Apocrita (19); Trichoptera: Hydropsychoidea (1) and Limnephiloidea (2); Lepidoptera: Ditrysia (3); Siphonaptera: Pulicoidea (1) and Ceratophylloidea (2); Mecoptera: Meropeidae (1), Boreidae (1), Panorpidae (1), and Bittacidae (2); Diptera: Nematocera (1), Brachycera (2), and Cyclorrhapha (1); and Strepsiptera: Corioxenidae (1), Myrmecolacidae (1), Elenchidae (1), and Stylopidae (3). We analyzed ~1 kilobase of 18S rDNA, starting 398 nucleotides downstream of the 5 end, and ~400 bp of 28S rDNA in expansion segment D3. Multiple alignment of the 18S and 28S sequences resulted in 1,116 nucleotide positions with 24 insert regions and 398 positions with 14 insert regions, respectively. All Strepsiptera and Neuroptera have large insert regions in 18S and 28S. The secondary structure of 18S insert 23 is composed of long stems that are GC rich in the basal Strepsiptera and AT rich in the more derived Strepsiptera. A matrix of 176 morphological characters was analyzed for holometabolous orders. Incongruence length difference tests indicate that the 28S + morphological data sets are incongruent but that 28S + 18S, 18S + morphology, and 28S + 18S + morphology fail to reject the hypothesis of congruence. Phylogenetic trees were generated by parsimony analysis, and clade robustness was evaluated by branch length, Bremer support, percentage of extra steps required to force paraphyly, and sensitivity analysis using the following parameters: gap weights, morphological character weights, methods of data set combination, removal of key taxa, and alignment region. The following are monophyletic under most or all combinations of parameter values: Holometabola, Polyphaga, Megaloptera + Raphidioptera, Neuroptera, Hymenoptera, Trichoptera, Lepidoptera, Amphiesmenoptera (Trichoptera + Lepidoptera), Siphonaptera, Siphonaptera + Mecoptera, Strepsiptera, Diptera, and Strepsiptera + Diptera (Halteria). Antliophora (Mecoptera + Diptera + Siphonaptera + Strepsiptera), Mecopterida (Antliophora + Amphiesmenoptera), and Hymenoptera + Mecopterida are supported in the majority of total evidence analyses. Mecoptera may be paraphyletic because Boreus is often placed as sister group to the fleas; hence, Siphonaptera may be subordinate within Mecoptera. The 18S sequences for Priacma (Coleoptera: Archostemata), Colpocaccus (Coleoptera: Adephaga), Agulla (Raphidioptera), and Corydalus (Megaloptera) are nearly identical, and Neuropterida are monophyletic only when those two beetle sequences are removed from the analysis. Coleoptera are therefore paraphyletic under almost all combinations of parameter values. Halteria and Amphiesmenoptera have high Bremer support values and long branch lengths. The data do not support placement of Strepsiptera outside of Holometabola nor as sister group to Coleoptera. We reject the notion that the monophyly of Halteria is due to long branch attraction because Strepsiptera and Diptera do not have the longest branches and there is phylogenetic congruence between molecules, across the entire parameter space, and between morphological and molecular data.
S318	D. A. Baum;R. L. Small;J. F. Wendel	1998	Biogeography and floral evolution of baobabs (Adansonia, Bombacaceae) as inferred from multiple data sets	Systematic Biology	47	2	181-207	10.1080/106351598260879		Biogeography; data set conflict; floral evolution; Gondwana; introgression; molecular clock; phylogeny	The phylogeny of baobab trees was analyzed using four data sets: chloroplast DNA restriction-sites, sequences of the chloroplast rpl16 intron, sequences of the ITS region of nuclear rDNA, and morphology. We sampled at least one accession of all eight species of Adansonia plus three outgroup taxa from tribe Adansonieae. These data were analyzed singly and in combination using parsimony. ITS and morphology provided the greatest resolution and were highly concordant. The two chloroplast data sets showed concordance with one another but disagreed with ITS and morphology. This disagreement was found to be significant using a Wilcoxon sign-rank test and an incongruence length difference test. The most likely explanation of the conflict is genealogical discordance within the Malagasy Longitubae, perhaps due to introgression events. A maximum-likelihood analysis of branching times shows that the dispersal between Africa and Australia occurred well after the fragmentation of Gondwana and, therefore, involved over-water dispersal. The phylogeny does not permit unambiguous reconstruction of floral evolution, but suggests the plausible hypothesis that hawkmoth pollination was ancestral in Adansonia and that there were two parallel switches to mammal-pollination in the genus.
S340	D. C. Cannatella;D. M. Hillis;P. T. Chippindale;L. Weight;A. S. Rand;M. J. Ryan	1998	Phylogeny of frogs of the Physalaemus pustulosus species group with an examination of data incongruence	Systematic Biology	47	2	311-335	10.1080/106351598260932		Advertisement calls; behavior; combined-data analysis; data partitions; frogs; Leptodactylidae; Physalaemus; sensory exploitation hypothesis	Characters derived from advertisement calls, morphology, allozymes, and the sequences of the small subunit of the mitochondrial ribosomal gene (12S) and the COI mitochondrial gene were used to estimate the phylogeny of frogs of the Physalaemus pustulosus group (Leptodactylidae). The combinability of these data partitions was assessed in several ways: measures of phylogenetic signal, character support for trees, congruence of tree topologies, compatibility of data partitions with suboptimal trees, and homogeneity of data partitions. Combined parsimony analysis of all data equally weighted yielded the same tree as the 12S partition analyzed under parsimony and maximum likelihood. The COI, allozyme, and morphology partitions were generally congruent and compatible with the tree derived from combined data. The call data were significantly different from all other partitions, whether considered in terms of tree topology alone, partition homogeneity, or compatibility of data with trees derived from other partitions. The lack of effect of the call data on the topology of the combined tree is probably due to the small number of call characters. The general incongruence of the call data with other data partitions is consistent with the idea that the advertisement calls of this group of frogs are under strong sexual selection.
S345	J. I. Davis;M. P. Simmons;D. W. Stevenson;J. F. Wendel	1998	Data decisiveness, data quality, and incongrunce in phylogenetic analysis: an example from the monocotyledons using mitochondrial atpA sequences	Systematic Biology	47	2	282-310	10.1080/106351598260923		atp A; character incongruence; cladistics; data decisiveness; monocotyledons; plant mitochondrial DNA; rbcL; restriction sites	We examined three parallel data sets with respect to qualities relevant to phylogenetic analysis of 20 exemplar monocotyledons and related dicotyledons. The three data sets represent restriction site variation in the inverted repeat region of the chloroplast genome, and nucleotide sequence variation in the chloroplast-encoded gene rbcL and in the mitochondrion-encoded gene atpA, the latter of which encodes the *-subunit of mitochondrial ATP synthase. The plant mitochondrial genome has been little-used in plant systematics, in part because nucleotide sequence evolution in enzyme-encoding genes of this genome evolve relatively slowly. The three data sets were examined in separate and combined analyses, with a focus on patterns of congruence, homoplasy, and data decisiveness. Data decisiveness (described by P. Goloboff) is a measure of robustness of support for most-parsimonious trees by a data set in terms of the degree to which those trees are shorter than the average length of all possible trees. Because indecisive data sets require relatively fewer additional steps than decisive ones to be optimized on nonparsimonious trees, they will have a lesser tendency to be incongruent with other data sets. One consequence of this relationship between decisiveness and character incongruence is that if incongruence is used as a criterion of noncombinability, decisive data sets, which provide robust support for relationships, are more likely to be assessed as noncombinable with other data sets than are indecisive data sets, which provide weak support for relationships. For the sampling of taxa in this study, the atpA data set has about half as many cladistically informative nucleotides as the rbcL data set per site examined, and is less homoplastic and more decisive. The rbcL data set, which is the least decisive of the three, exhibits the lowest levels of character incongruence. Whatever the molecular evolutionary cause of this phenomenon, it seems likely that the poorer performance of rbcL than atpA, in terms of data decisiveness, is due to both its higher overall level of homoplasy and the fact that it is performing especially poorly at nonsynonymous sites.
S241	S. L. Messenger;J. A. McGuire	1998	Morphology, molecules, and the phylogenetics of cetaceans	Systematic Biology	47	1	90-124	10.1080/106351598261058		Cetacea; DNA sequences; likelihood-ratio test; molecular clock; morphology; Mysticeti; Odontoceti; partition-homogeneity test; phylogeny; Templeton test	Recent phylogenetic analyses of cetacean relationships based on DNA sequence data have challenged the traditional view that baleen whales (Mysticeti) and toothed whales (Odontoceti) are each monophyletic, arguing instead that baleen whales are the sister group of the odontocete family Physeteridae (sperm whales). We reexamined this issue in light of a morphological data set composed of 207 characters and molecular data sets of published 12S, 16S, and cytochrome b mitochondrial DNA sequences. We reach four primary conclusions: (1) our morphological data set strongly supports the traditional view of odontocete monophyly; (2) the unrooted molecular and morphological trees are very similar, and most of the conflict results from alternative rooting positions; (3) the rooting position of the molecular tree is sensitive to choice of artiodactyl outgroup taxa and the treatment of two small but ambiguously aligned regions of the 12S and 16S sequences, whereas the morphological root is strongly supported; and (4) combined analyses of the morphological and molecular data provide a well-supported phylogenetic estimate consistent with that based on the morphological data alone (and the traditional view of toothed-whale monophyly) but with increased bootstrap support at nearly every node of the tree.
S431	P. K. Flook;S. Klee;C. H. F. Rowell	1999	Combined molecular phylogenetic analysis of the Orthoptera (Arthropoda, Insecta) and implications for their higher systematics	Systematic Biology	48	2	233-253	10.1080/106351599260274		Combined analysis; insect phylogeny; molecular evolution; Orthoptera; ribosomal DNA	A phylogenetic analysis of mitochondrial and nuclear rDNA sequences from species of all the superfamilies of the insect order Orthoptera (grasshoppers, crickets and relatives) confirmed that although mitochondrial sequences provided good resolution of the youngest superfamilies, nuclear rDNA sequences were necessary to separate the basal groups. To try to reconcile these data sets into a single fully resolved orthopteran phylogeny, we adopted consensus and combined data strategies. The consensus analysis produced a partially resolved tree, lacking several well-supported features of the individual analyses. However, this lack of resolution was explained by an examination of resampled data sets that identified the likely source of error as the relatively short length of the individual mitochondrial data partitions. In a subsequent comparison in which the mitochondrial sequences were initially combined, we observed less conflict. We then used two approaches to examine the validity of combining all of the data in a single analysis; comparative analysis of trees recovered from resampled data sets and the application of a randomization test. The results did not point to significant levels of heterogeneity in phylogenetic signal between the mitochondrial and nuclear data sets, and we therefore proceeded with a combined analysis. Reconstructing phylogenies under the minimum evolution and maximum likelihood optimality criteria, we examined monophyly of the major orthopteran groups using nonparametric and parametric bootstrap analysis and Kishino-Hasegawa tests. Our analysis suggests that phylogeny reconstruction under the ML criteria is the most discriminating approach for the combined sequences. The results indicate that the caeliferan Pneumoroidea and Pamphagoidea (as previously suggested) are polyphyletic. The Acridoidea is redefined to include all pamphagoid families other than the Pyrgomorphidae, which we propose should be accorded superfamily status.
S435	J. P. Hugot	1999	Primates and their pinworm parasites: the Cameron hypothesis revisited	Systematic Biology	48	3	523-546	10.1080/106351599260120		Cameron's hypothesis; cospeciation; Enterobiinae; host/parasite coevolution; Nematoda; Oxyurid; pinworm; Primate	A morphologically based cladistic analysis of the Enterobiinae, which includes most of the Oxyuridae parasitic in Primates, allows a re-evaluation of the Cameron's hypothesis of close coevolution between hosts and parasites. Each of the three genera separated in the Enterobiinae fit with one of the suborders defined in Primates: Lemuricola with the Strepsirhini, Trypanoxyuris with the Platyrrhini, and Enterobius with the Catarrhini. Inside each of the three main groups, the subdivisions observed in the parasite tree also fit with many of the subdivisions generally accepted within the Primate order. These results confirm the subgroups previously described in the subfamily and support Cameron's hypothesis in its aspect of association by descent. Although the classification of the Enterobiinae generally closely underlines the classification of Primates, several discordances are also observed. These are discussed case by case, with use of computed reconstruction scenarios. Given that the occurrences of the same pinworm species as a parasite for several congeneric host species is not the generalised pattern, and given that several occurrences also are observed in which the speciations of the parasites describe a more complex network, Cameron's hypothesis of a slower rhythm of speciation in the parasites can be considered partly refuted. The presence of two genera parasitic on squirrels in a family which contains primarily primate parasites is also discussed. The cladistic analysis does not support close relationships between the squirrel parasites and suggests an early separation from the Enterobiinae for the first one (Xeroxyuris), and a tardy host-switching from the Platyrrhini to the squirrels for the second. (Rodentoxyuris).
S432	T. R. Jackman;A. Larson;K. de Queiroz;J. B. Losos	1999	Phylogenetic relationships and tempo of early diversification in Anolis lizards	Systematic Biology	48	2	254-285	10.1080/106351599260283		Anolis; mitochondrial DNA; parametric bootstrap; permutation test; phylogeny; polytomy	We examine phylogenetic relationships among anoles using mitochondrial DNA sequences from the NADH dehydrogenase subunit 2 gene (ND2) and five transfer-RNA genes representing 1,455 alignable base positions and 866 phylogenetically informative characters (parsimony criterion). We also present 16 morphological characters for phylogenetic analysis. Our analyses yielded poorly-supported nodes deep in the anole tree but many well-supported nodes for more recent phylogenetic divergences. We test the hypothesis that the major clades of anoles form a hard polytomy and present a general statistical framework for testing hypothesis of simultaneous branching of lineages by using molecular sequence data. Our results suggest that rapid diversification early in the evolutionary history of anoles explains why numberous researchers have had difficulty reconstruction well-supported dichotomous phylogenetic trees for anoles.
S438	J. M. Marcus;A. R. McCune	1999	Ontogeny and phylogeny in the northern swordtail clade of Xiphophorus	Systematic Biology	48	3	491-522	10.1080/106351599260111		Development; evolution; growth; heterochrony; independent contrasts; sword; Xiphophorus	It has been hypothesized than morphological diversity within clades can be generated by simple alterations of shared developmental programs. However, few studies have examined changes in heterochrony, the rate and timing of developmental events, in an explicitly phylogenetic context. We studied how developmental patterns have changed phylogenetically in the northern swordtail clade of Xiphophorus. We reared individuals of an outgroup and seven of nine species in the clade and followed their development for ~300 days. For each individual, we used nonlinear regression to estimate three growth parameters: growth rate, adult body size, and age of cessation of growth. We estimated sword growth rates in males by linear regression. We then used the means of these growth parameters to construct standard growth curves for each species and to study growth patterns in a phylogenetic context. A combined phylogeny was constructed from both phenotypic and DNA sequence data. The phenotypic data set, compiled from the literature, consisted of 86 morphological, pigmentation, behavioral, and random amplified polymorphic DNA characters, many of which had not been used before for phylogenetic analysis. DNA sequence data from three genes for a total of 1284 bases were also obtained from the literature and included in the analysis. Relationships between growth parameters were examined by phylogenetically independent contrasts in relation to seven different phylogenies based on the most-parsimonious trees generated from the phenotypic, DNA sequence, and combined data sets; this allowed us to identify relationships between variables that were not sensitive to ambiguities in Xiphophorus phylogeny. Our analysis revealed statistically significant correlations between female body size and male body size, and between female growth rate and male sword growth rate, for all seven phylogenies. Marginally statistically significant relationships were also identified between female body size and female growth rate, and between female growth rate and male body size. We relate these relationships to what is known about the ecology, genetics, and behavior of Xiphophorus to better understand the evolution of growth patterns of both the body as a whole and the sword in particular. The relationship of these data to the evolution of swords is discussed.
S387	M. A. O'Leary;J. H. Geisler	1999	The position of Cetacea within Mammalia: Phylogenetic analaysis of morphological data from extinct and extant taxa	Systematic Biology	48	3	455-490	10.1080/106351599260102		Artiodactyla; astragalus; Cetacea; fossils; homoplasy; Mesonychia; morphology; phylogeny	Knowledge of the phylogenetic position of the order Cetacea (whales, dolphins, and porpoises) within Mammalia is of central importance to evolutionary biologists studying the transformations of biological form and function that accompanied the shift from fully terrestrial to fully aquatic life in this clade. Phylogenies based on molecular data and those based on morphological data both place cetaceans among ungulates but are incongruent in other respects. Morphologists argue that cetaceans are most closely related to mesonychians, an extinct group of terrestrial ungulates. They have disagreed, however, as to whether Perissodactyla (odd-toed ungulates) or Artiodactyla (even-toed ungulates) is the extant clade most closely related to Cetacea, and have long maintained that each of these orders is monophyletic. The great majority of molecule-based phylogenies show, by contrast, not only that artiodactyls are the closest extant relatives of Cetacea, but also, that Artiodactyla is paraphyletic unless cetaceans are nested within it, often as the sister group of hippopotamids. We tested morphological evidence for several hypotheses concerning the sister taxon relationships of Cetacea in a maximum parsimony analysis of 123 morphological characters from 10 extant and 30 extinct taxa. We advocate treating certain multistate characters as ordered because such a procedure incorporates information about hierarchical morphological transformation. In all most-parsimonious trees, whether multistate characters are ordered or unordered, Artiodactyla is the extant sister taxon of Cetacea. With certain multistate characters ordered, the extinct clade Mesonychia (Mesonychidae + Hapalodectidae) is the sister taxon of Cetacea, and Artiodactyla is monophyletic. When all fossils are removed from the analysis, Artiodactyla is paraphyletic with Cetacea nested inside, indicating that inclusion of mesonychians and other extinct stem taxa in a phylogenetic analysis of the ungulate clade is integral to the recovery of artiodactyl monophyly. Phylogenies derived from molecular data alone may risk recovering inconsistent branches because of an inability to sample extinct clades, which by a conservative estimate amounts to 89% of the ingroup. Addition of data from recently described cetacean astragali attributed to cetaceans does not overturn artiodactyl monophyly. 
S437	D. L. J. Quicke;R. Belshaw	1999	Incongruence between morphological data sets: an example from the evolution of endoparasitism among parasitic wasps (Hymenoptera: Braconidae)	Systematic Biology	48	3	436-454	10.1080/106351599260094		Conflict; convergence; homoplasy; Hymenoptera; incongruence; parasitoid	Phylogenetic analyses of molecular and morphological data sets for a group of parasitic wasps (Hymenoptera: Braconidae) give strikingly different results. The molecular data indicate that the major life history transition from ectoparasitism to endoparasitism has occurred independently several times within the family while the morphological data indicate a single origin. Similar incongruent topologies are obtained if the morphological data are partitioned by either of two methods: distinguishing (1) characters of the larval stage and female reproductive system, or (2) characters selected individually by the authors prior to the analysis as likely to be mechanistically associated with endo/ectoparasitism. This result is supported by significant differences in tests of incongruence, and we propose that it is caused by convergence among morphological characters resulting from a shared life history strategy. 
S518	S. J. Steppan;M. R. Akhverdyan;E. A. Lyapunova;D. G. Fraser;N. N. Vorontsov;R. S. Hoffmann;M. J. Braun	1999	Molecular phylogeny of the marmots (Rodentia: Sciuridae): tests of evolutionary and biogeographic hypotheses	Systematic Biology	48	4	715-734	10.1080/106351599259988		Beringia; cytochrome b; Holarctic; hypothesis testing; Marmota; phylogenetics	There are 14 species of marmots distributed across the Holarctic, and despite extensive systematic study, their phylogenetic relationships remain largely unresolved. In particular, comprehensive studies have been lacking. A well-supported phylogeny is needed to place the numerous ecological and behavioral studies on marmots in an evolutionary context. To address this situation, we obtained complete cytochrome (cyt) b sequences for 13 of the species and partial sequence for the 14th. We employed a statistical approach to both phylogeny estimation and hypothesis testing using parsimony and maximum likelihood based methods. We conducted statistical tests on a suite of previously proposed hypotheses of phylogenetic relationships and biogeographic histories. The cyt b data strongly support the monophyly of Marmota and a western montane clade in the Nearctic. The results are consistent with an initial diversification in North America followed by an invasion and subsequent rapid diversification in the Palearctic. These analyses reject the two major competing hypotheses of M. broweriÌs phylogenetic relationships: namely, that it is the sister species to camtschatica of eastern Siberia and that it is related closely to caligata of the Nearctic. The Alaskan distribution of M. broweri is best explained as a reinvasion from the Palearctic but a Nearctic origin can not be rejected. Several other conventionally recognized species groups can also be rejected. Social evolution has been homoplastic, with large colonial systems evolving in two groups convergently. The cyt b data do not provide unambiguous resolution of several basal nodes in the Palearctic radiation, leaving some aspects of pelage and karyotypic evolution equivocal.
S828	J. G. M. Thewissen;S. I. Madar	1999	Ankle morphology of the earliest Cetaceans and its implications for the phylogenetic relations among Ungulates	Systematic Biology	48	1	21-30	10.1080/106351599260418		Artiodactyla; Cetacea; locomotion; Mesonychia; Ungulata	Recent molecular studies are inconsistent with ungulate phylogenetic trees that are based on morphological traits. These inconsistencies especially relate to the position of cetaceans and perissodactyls. Evaluation of the close phylogenetic ties between artiodactyls and cetaceans has been hampered by the absence of tarsal bones of primitive cetaceans, as artiodactyls are often diagnosed on the basis of their tarsus. We here describe newly discovered tarsal bones that are the oldest cetacean tarsals known. We present a character analysis for primitive ungulate tarsals and evaluate their impact on the ungulate phylogenetic tree. Tarsal data are consistent with some molecular studies in suggesting that the extant sistergroup of Cetacea is Artiodactyla or that Cetacea should be included within the latter order. Tarsal data do not support Cete (Mesonychia plus Cetacea) and are consistent with the exclusion of perissodactyls from paenungulates as suggested by some molecular studies. 
S433	M. A. M. van Dijk;E. Paradis;F. Catzeflis;W. de Jong	1999	The virtues of gaps: Xenarthran (Edentate) monophyly supported by a unique deletion in αA-crystallin	Systematic Biology	48	1	94-106	10.1080/106351599260463		Edentata; indels; molecular phylogeny; Xenarthra	Shared insertions or deletions (indels) in protein-coding DNA can be strong indicators of the monophyly of a taxon. A three-amino acid deletion had previously been noted in the eye lens protein (A-crystallin of two species of sloths and two species of anteaters, which represent the Pilosa, one of the two infraorders of Xenarthra (Edentata). This deletion has not been observed in 55 species from 16 other eutherian orders, nor in two species of marsupials and 34 non-mammalian vertebrates, from birds to shark. At the genomic level, we have now detected this deletion in two species of armadillos of the second xenarthran infraorder, Cingulata, as well as in an additional species of anteater. Phylogenetic trees were constructed from a 145-bp sequence of the (A-crystallin gene of 39 tetrapod species, supporting xenarthran monophyly with values from 86 to 90%. To quantify the additional support for xenarthran monophyly, as given by the three-residue deletion, we computed the probabilities for the occurrence of this deletion per evolutionary time unit for alternative hypothetical tree topologies. In the obtained estimates, the six trees in which the xenarthran subgroups are unresolved or paraphyletic give an increasingly lower likelihood than the two trees which assume xenarthran monophyly. For the monophyletic trees, the probability that the deletion observed in the xenarthrans is due to a single event is >0.99. Thus, this deletion in (A-crystallin gives strong molecular support for the monophyly of this old and diverse order. 
S637	C. H. Cannon;P. S. Manos	2001	Combining and comparing morphometric shape descriptors with a molecular phylogeny: the case of fruit type evolution in Bornean Lithocarpus (Fagaceae)	Systematic Biology	50	6	860-880	10.1080/106351501753462849		Branch length estimates; continuous characters; eigenshape; enclosed receptacle; Fourier; matrix representation	Fruit type in the genus Lithocarpus (Fagaceae) includes both classic oak acorns and novel modifications. Bornean taxa with modified fruits can be separated into two sections (Synaedrys and Lithocarpus) based on subtle shape differences. By following strict criteria for homology and representation, this variation in shape can be captured and the sections distinguished by using elliptic Fourier or eigenshape analysis. Phenograms of fruit shape, constructed by using restricted maximum likelihood techniques and these morphometric descriptors, were incorporated into combined and comparative analyses with molecular sequence data from the internal transcribed spacer (ITS) region of the nuclear rDNA, using branch-weighted matrix representation. The combined analysis strongly suggested independent derivation of the novel fruit type in the two sections from different acornlike ancestors, while the comparative analysis indicated frequent decoupling between the molecular and morphological changes as inferred at well-supported nodes. The acorn fruit type has undergone little modification between ingroup and outgroup, despite large molecular distance. Greater morphological than molecular change was inferred at critical transitions between acorn and novel fruit types, particularly for section Lithocarpus. The combination of these two different types of data improved our understanding of the macroevolution of fruit type in this difficult group, and the comparative analysis highlighted the significant incongruities in evolutionary pattern between the two datasets.
S679	M. Fishbein;C. Hibsch-Jetter;D. E. Soltis;L. Hufford	2001	Phylogeny of Saxifragales (Angiosperms, Eudicots): Analysis of a Rapid, Ancient Radiation	Systematic Biology	50	6	817-847	10.1080/106351501753462821		Chloroplast genes; data partition congruence; maximum likelihood estimation and hypothesis testing; phylogenetic resolution; rapid radiation; ribosomal DNA; Saxifragales	Rapid, ancient radiations pose one of the most difficult challenges for phylogenetic estimation. We used DNA sequence data of 9,006 aligned base pairs from five genes (chloroplast atpB, matK, rbcL, and 18S and 26S nrDNA) to elucidate relationships among major lineages of Saxifragales (angiosperms, eudicots). These relationships were poorly supported in previous studies, apparently because the lineages originated in rapid succession. Using an array of methods that explicitly incorporate assumptions about evolutionary process (weighted maximum parsimony, maximum likelihood, LogDet/paralinear transformed distances), we show that the initial diversification of Saxifragales was indeed rapid. We suggest that the poor resolution of our best phylogenetic estimate is not due to violations of assumptions or to combining data partitions having conflicting histories or processes. We show that estimated branch lengths during the initial diversification are exceedingly short, and we estimate that acquiring sufficient sequence data to resolve these relationships would require an extraordinary effort (≈10^7 bp), assuming a linear increase in branch support with branch length. However, our simulation of much larger data sets containing a distribution of phylogenetic signal similar to that of the five sampled gene sequences suggests a limit to achievable branch support. Using statistical tests of differences in the likelihoods of topologies, we evaluated whether the initial radiation of Saxifragales involved the simultaneous origin of major lineages. Our results are consistent with predictions that resolving branching order of rapid, ancient radiations requires sampling characters that evolved rapidly at the time of the radiation but have since experienced a slower evolutionary rate.
S581	D. S. Hibbett;M. J. Donoghue	2001	Analysis of character correlations among wood decay mechanisms, mating systems, and substrate ranges in homobasidiomycetes	Systematic Biology	50	2	215-242	10.1080/10635150121079		Ancestral state reconstruction; basidiomycetes; comparative methods; concentrated changes test; Discrete; fungal ecology; Polyporaceae; rDNA; sensitivity analyses; wood decay	Homobasidiomycetes include the majority of wood-decaying fungi. Two basic forms of wood decay are known in homobasidiomycetes: white rot, in which lignin and cellulose are degraded, and brown rot, in which lignin is not appreciably degraded. An apparent correlation has been noted between production of a brown rot, decay of conifer substrates, and possession of a bipolar mating system (which has a single mating-type locus, in contrast to tetrapolar systems, which have two mating-type loci). The goals of this study were to infer the historical pattern of transformations in decay mode, mating type, and substrate range characters, and to determine if a causal relationship exists among them. Using nuclear and mitochondrial rDNA sequences, we performed a phylogenetic analysis of 130 species of homobasidiomycetes and performed ancestral state reconstructions by using parsimony on a range of trees, with various loss:gain cost ratios. We evaluated pairwise character correlations by using the concentrated changes test (CCT) of Maddison and the maximum likelihood (ML) method of Pagel. White rot, tetrapolar mating systems, and the ability to decay conifers and hardwoods appear to be plesiomorphic in homobasidiomycetes, whereas brown rot, bipolar mating systems, and exclusive decay of conifers appear to have evolved repeatedly. The only significant correlation among characters was that between brown rot (as the independent character) and exclusive decay of conifer substrates (P < 0.03). This correlation was supported by the CCT on a range of plausible trees, although not with every reconstruction of ancestral states, and by the ML test. Our findings suggest that the evolution of brown rot has promoted repeated shifts to specialization for conifer substrates.
S713	K. M. Kjer;R. J. Blahnik;R. W. Holzenthal	2001	Phylogeny of Trichoptera (Caddisflies): Characterization of Signal and Noise Within Multiple Datasets	Systematic Biology	50	6	781-816	10.1080/106351501753462812		Annulipalpia; Bayesian inference; dataset combination; homoplasy; Integripalpia; Spicipalpia; pseudoreplicate reweighting	Trichoptera are holometabolous insects with aquatic larvae that, together with the Lepidoptera, make up the Amphiesmenoptera. Despite extensive previous morphological work, little phylogenetic agreement has been reached about the relationship among the three suborders—Annulipalpia, Spicipalpia, and Integripalpia—or about the monophyly of Spicipalpia. In an effort to resolve this conflict, we sequenced fragments of the large and small subunit nuclear ribosomal RNAs (1078 nt; D1, D3, V4–5), the nuclear elongation factor 1{alpha} gene (EF-1α; 1098 nt), and a fragment of mitochondrial cytochrome oxidase I (COI; 411 nt). Seventy adult and larval morphological characters were reanalyzed and added to molecular data in a combined analysis. We evaluated signal and homoplasy in each of the molecular datasets and attempted to rank the particular datasets according to how appropriate they were for inferring relationships among suborders. This evaluation included testing for conflict among datasets, comparing tree lengths among alternative hypotheses, measuring the left-skew of tree-length distributions from maximally divergent sets of taxa, evaluating the recovery of expected clades, visualizing whether or not substitutions were accumulating with time, and estimating nucleotide compositional bias.; Although all these measures cast doubt on the reliability of the deep-level signal coming from the nucleotides of the COI and EF-1α genes, these data could still be included in combined analyses without overturning the results from the most conservative marker, the rRNA. The different datasets were found to be evolving under extremely different rates.; A site-specific likelihood method for dealing with combined data with nonoverlapping parameters was proposed, and a similar weighting scheme under parsimony was evaluated.; Among our phylogenetic conclusions, we found Annulipalpia to be the most basal of the three suborders, with Spicipalpia and Integripalpia forming a clade. Monophyly of Annulipalpia and Integripalpia was confirmed, but the relationships among spicipalpians remain equivocal.
S1971	G. D. Weiblen	2001	Phylogenetic relationships of fig wasps pollinating functionally dioecious Ficus based on mitochondrial DNA sequences and morphology	Systematic Biology	50	2	243-267	10.1093/sysbio/50.2.243			The obligate mutualism between pollinating wasps in the family Agaonidae (Hymenoptera: Chalcidoidea) and Ficus species (Moraceae) is often regarded as an example of coevolution but little is known about the history of the interaction, and understanding the origin of functionally dioecious pollination has been especially difficult. The phylogenetic relationships of wasps pollinating functionally dioecious Ficus were inferred from mitochondrial cytochrome oxidase gene sequences (mtDNA) and morphology. Separate and combined analyses indicated that the pollinators of functionally dioecious figs are not monophyletic. However, pollinator relationships were generally congruent with host phylogeny and support a revised classication of Ficus. Ancestral changes in pollinator ovipositor length also correlated with changes in breeding systems. In particular, the relative elongation of the ovipositor was associated with the repeated loss of functionally dioecious pollination. The concerted evolution of interacting morphologies may bias estimates of phylogeny based on female head characters, but homoplasy is not so strong in other morphological traits. The lesser phylogenetic utility of morphology than of mtDNA is not due to rampant convergence in morphology but rather to the greater number of potentially informative characters in DNA sequence data; patterns of nucleotide substitution also limit the utility of mtDNA findings. Nonetheless, inferring the ancestral associations of pollinators fromthe best-supported phylogeny provided strong evidence of host conservatism in this highly specialized mutualism. [Post-publication note: Some taxa in the original publication were misidentified. Corrected names are available under Genbank accession numbers and in Table 1 of Silvieus, S. I., W. L. Clement, and G. D. Weiblen. 2007. Cophylogeny of figs, pollinators, gallers and parasitoids. Pp. 225-239 in K. J. Tilmon, ed. Specialization, Speciation, and Radiation: The Evolutionary Biology of Herbivorous Insects. University of California Press, Berkeley, California.]
S700	B. L. Lundrigan;S. A. Jansa;P. K. Tucker	2002	Phylogenetic relationships in the genus Mus, based on paternally, maternally, and biparentally inherited characters	Systematic Biology	51	3	410-431	10.1080/10635150290069878		Coelomys; molecular phylogeny; Muridae; Mus; Nannomys; Pyromys	Several species in the rodent genus Mus are used as model research organisms, but comparative studies of these mice have been hampered by the lack of a well-supported phylogeny. We used DNA sequences from six genes representing paternally, maternally, and biparentally inherited regions of the genome to infer phylogenetic relationships among 10 species of Mus commonly used in laboratory research. Our sample included seven species from the subgenus Mus; one species each from the subgenera Pyromys, Coelomys, and Nannomys; and representatives from three additional murine genera, which served as outgroups in the phylogenetic analyses. Although each of the six genes yielded a unique phylogeny, several clades were supported by four or more gene trees. Nodes that conflicted between trees were generally characterized by weak support for one or both of the alternative topologies, thus providing no compelling evidence that any individual gene, or part of the genome, was misleading with respect to the evolutionary history of these mice. Analysis of the combined data resulted in a fully resolved tree that strongly supports monophyly of the genus Mus, monophyly of the subgenus Mus, division of the subgenus Mus into Palearctic (M. musculus, M. macedonicus, M. spicilegus, and M. spretus) and Asian (M. cervicolor, M. cookii, and M. caroli) clades, monophyly of the house mice (M. m. musculus, "M. m. molossinus," M. m. castaneus, and M. m. domesticus), and a sister-group relationship between M. macedonicus and M. spicilegus. Other clades that were strongly supported by one or more gene partitions were not strongly supported by the combined data. This appears to reflect a localized homoplasy in one partition obscuring the phylogenetic signal from another, rather than differences in gene or genome histories.
S764	A. E. Marvaldi;A. S. Sequeira;C. W. O'Brien;B. D. Farrell	2002	Molecular and morphological phylogenetics of weevils (Coleoptera, Curculionoidea): Do niche shifts accompany diversification?	Systematic Biology	51	5	761-785	10.1080/10635150290102465		18S rDNA; diversification; host associations; larval habits; morphology; phylogenetics; weevils	The main goals of this study were to provide a robust phylogeny for the families of the superfamily Curculionoidea, to discover relationships and major natural groups within the family Curculionidae, and to clarify the evolution of larval habits and host-plant associations in weevils to analyze their role in weevil diversification. Phylogenetic relationships among the weevils (Curculionoidea) were inferred from analysis of nucleotide sequences of 18S ribosomal DNA (rDNA; ~2,000 bases) and 115 morphological characters of larval and adult stages. A worldwide sample of 100 species was compiled to maximize representation of weevil morphological and ecological diversity. All families and the main subfamilies of Curculionoidea were represented. The family Curculionidae sensu lato was represented by about 80 species in 30 "subfamilies" of traditional classifications. Phylogenetic reconstruction was accomplished by parsimony analysis of separate and combined molecular and morphological data matrices and Bayesian analysis of the molecular data; tree topology support was evaluated. Results of the combined analysis of 18S rDNA and morphological data indicate that monophyly of and relationships among each of the weevil families are well supported with the topology ((Nemonychidae, Anthribidae) (Belidae (Attelabidae (Caridae (Brentidae, Curculionidae))))). Within the clade Curculionidae sensu lato, the basal positions are occupied by mostly monocot-associated taxa with the primitive type of male genitalia followed by the Curculionidae sensu stricto, which is made up of groups with the derived type of male genitalia. High support values were found for the monophyly of some distinct curculionid groups such as Dryophthorinae (several tribes represented) and Platypodinae (Tesserocerini plus Platypodini), among others. However, the subfamilial relationships in Curculionidae are unresolved or weakly supported. The phylogeny estimate based on combined 18S rDNA and morphological data suggests that diversification in weevils was accompanied by niche shifts in host-plant associations and larval habits. Pronounced conservatism is evident in larval feeding habits, particularly in the host tissue consumed. Multiple shifts to use of angiosperms in Curculionoidea were identified, each time associated with increases in weevil diversity and subsequent shifts back to gymnosperms, particularly in the Curculionidae.
S697	J. M. Waters;T. Saruwatar;T. Kobayashi;I. Oohara;R. M. McDowall;G. P. Wallis	2002	Phylogenetic placement of retropinnid fishes: data set incongruence can be reduced using asymmetric character state transformation costs	Systematic Biology	51	3	432-449	10.1080/10635150290069887		16S; Australia; character transformation; congruence; cyt b; galaxiid; New Zealand; osmerid; retropinnid; smelt	We used mitochondrial DNA sequences to determine the phylogenetic placement of southern smelts (Retropinnidae), a group of diadromous fishes endemic to New Zealand and Australia. Our genetic data strongly support a sister group relationship between retropinnids and northern hemisphere smelts (Osmeridae), a relationship that seems consistent with the similar appearance and life history strategies of these two groups. Our analysis indicates that Retropinnidae and Osmeridae together represent the sister group to the southern hemisphere galaxiid fishes (Galaxiidae). However, this finding conflicts with several recent osteological analyses, which supported a sister relationship for Retropinnidae and Galaxiidae, giving a monophyletic southern hemisphere assemblage (Galaxioidea). We review cases of incongruence and discuss factors that might explain significant disagreement between molecular and morphological data matrices. We suggest that repeated evolutionary simplification may have undermined the accuracy of morphological hypotheses of osmeroid relationships. Although equally weighted parsimony analysis of morphological data rejects the molecular hypothesis (Osmeridae + Retropinnidae), implementation of a range of weighting schemes suggests that incongruence is nonsignificant under asymmetric character transformation models. We propose that a simple "equal transformation cost" parsimony analysis may be biologically unrealistic, especially when reductive homoplasy is widespread; as is increasingly being accepted, complex character states are more readily lost than gained. Therefore, we recommend that morphological systematists routinely implement a range of character transformation models to assess the sensitivity of their phylogenetic reconstructions. We discuss the antitropical biogeography of osmeroid fishes in the context of vicariance and transequatorial dispersal.
S880	J. Harshman;C. J. Huddleston;J. P. Bollback;T. J. Parsons;M. J. Braun	2003	True and False Gharials: A Nuclear Gene Phylogeny of Crocodylia	Systematic Biology	52	3	386-402	10.1080/10635150390197028			The phylogeny of Crocodylia offers an unusual twist on the usual ?molecules vs. morphology? story. The true gharial (Gavialis gangeticus) and the false gharial (Tomistoma schlegelii), as their common names imply, are found in all cladistic morphological analyses to be distantly related species, convergent upon a similar morphology. In contrast, all previous molecular studies have found them to be sister taxa. We present the first phylogenetic study of Crocodylia using a nuclear gene. We cloned and sequenced the c-myc proto-oncogene from Alligator mississippiensis to facilitate primer design. Then we sequenced an 1100bp fragment that includes both coding and non-coding regions, as well as informative indels, for one species in each extant crocodylian genus and six avian outgroups. Phylogenetic analyses using parsimony, maximum likelihood, and Bayesian inference all strongly agree on the same tree, which is identical to the tree found in previous molecular analyses: Gavialis and Tomistoma are sister taxa, and together are the sister group of Crocodylidae. Kishino-Hasegawa tests reject the morphological tree in favor of the molecular tree. We exclude long branch attraction and variation in base composition among taxa as explanations for this topology. To explore the causes of discrepancy between molecular and morphological estimates of crocodylian phylogeny, we examined puzzling features of the morphological data using a priori partitions of the data based on anatomical regions, and investigated the effects of different codings of two obvious morphological similarities of the two gharials.
S894	S. Jordan;C. Simon;D. Polhemus	2003	Molecular systematics and adaptive radiation of Hawaii's endemic damselfly genus Megalagrion (Odonata: Coenagrionidae)	Systematic Biology	52	1	89-109	10.1080/10635150390132803			Damselflies of the endemic Hawaiian genus Megalagrion have radiated into a wide variety of habitats and are an excellent model group for the study of adaptive radiation. Past phylogenetic analysis based on morphological characters has been problematic. Here, we examine relationships among 56 individuals from 20 of the 23 described species using maximum likelihood (ML) and Bayesian phylogenetic analysis of mitochondrial (1,287 bp) and nuclear (1,039 bp) DNA sequence data. Models of evolution were chosen using the Akaike information criterion. Problems with distant outgroups were accommodated by constraining the best ML ingroup topology but allowing the outgroups to attach to any ingroup branch in a bootstrap analysis. No strong contradictions were obtained between either data partition and the combined data set. Areas of disagreement are mainly confined to clades that are strongly supported by the mitochondrial DNA and weakly supported by the elongation factor 1f data because of lack of changes. However, the combined analysis resulted in a unique tree. Correlation between Bayesian posterior probabilities and bootstrap percentages decreased in concert with decreasing information in the data partitions. In cases where nodes were supported by single characters bootstrap proportions were dramatically reduced compared with posterior probabilities. Two speciation patterns were evident from the phylogenetic analysis. First, most speciation is interisland and occurred as members of established ecological guilds colonized new volcanoes after they emerged from the sea. Second, there are several instances of rapid radiation into a variety of specialized habitats, in one case entirely within the island of Kauai. Application of a local clock procedure to the mitochondrial DNA topology suggests that two of these radiations correspond to the development of habitat on the islands of Kauai and Oahu. About 4.0 million years ago, species simultaneously moved into fast streams and plant leaf axils on Kauai, and about 1.5 million years later another group moved simultaneously to seeps and terrestrial habitats on Oahu. Results from the local clock analysis also strongly suggest that Megalagrion arrived in Hawaii about 10 million years ago, well before the emergence of Kauai. Date estimates were more sensitive to the particular node that was fixed in time than to the model of local branch evolution used. We propose a general model for the development of endemic damselfly species on Hawaiian Islands and document five potential cases of hybridization (M. xanthomelas 2 M. pacificum, M. eudytum 2 M. vagabundum, M. orobates 2 M. oresitrophum, M. nesiotes 2 M. oahuense, and M. mauka 2 M. paludicola).
S970	J. A. A. Nylander;F. Ronquist;J. P. Huelsenbeck;J. L. Nieves-Aldrey	2004	Bayesian Phylogenetic Analysis of Combined Data	Systematic Biology	53	1	47-67	10.1080/10635150490264699			The recent development of Bayesian phylogenetic inference using Markov chain Monte Carlo techniques has facilitated the exploration of parameter-rich evolutionary models. At the same time, stochastic models have become more realistic (and complex), and they have been extended to new types of data, such as morphology. Based on this foundation, we develop a Bayesian MCMC approach to the analysis of combined datasets and explore its utility in inferring relationships among gall wasps based on data from morphology and four genes (nuclear and mitochondrial, ribosomal and protein-coding). Examined models range in complexity from those recognizing only a morphological and a molecular partition to those having complex substitution models with independent parameters for each gene. We find that Bayesian MCMC analysis deals efficiently with complex models: convergence occurs faster and more predictably for complex models, mixing is adequate for all parameters even under very complex models, and the parameter update cycle is virtually unaffected by model partitioning across sites. Morphology contributes only 5 % of the characters in the dataset but nevertheless influences the combined-data tree, supporting the utility of morphological data in multi-gene analyses. We use Bayesian criteria (Bayes factors) to show that process heterogeneity across data partitions is a significant model component, although not as important as among-site rate variation. More complex evolutionary models are associated with more topological uncertainty and less conflict between morphology and molecules. Bayes factors sometimes favor simpler models over considerably more parameter-rich ones but the best model overall is also the most complex one and Bayes factors do not support exclusion of apparently weak parameters from this model. Thus, Bayes factors appear to be useful for selecting among complex models but it is still an open question whether their use strikes a reasonable balance between model complexity and error in parameter estimates.
S975	D. M. Percy;Q. C. B. Cronk;R. D. M. Page	2004	Plant-insect interactions: double-dating associated insect and plant lineages reveals asynchronous radiations	Systematic Biology	53	1	120-127	10.1080/10635150490264996			An increasing number of plant-insect studies using phylogenetic analysis suggest that cospeciation events are rare in plant-insect systems. Instead, non-random patterns of phylogenetic congruence are produced by phylogenetically conserved host switching (to related plants) or tracking of particular resources or traits (e.g. chemical). The dominance of host switching in many phytophagous insect groups may make the detection of genuine cospeciation events difficult. One important test of putative cospeciation events is to verify whether reciprocal speciation is temporally plausible. We explore techniques for double-dating of both plant and insect phylogenies. We use dated molecular phylogenies of a psyllid (Hemiptera) ñ Genisteae (Fabaceae) system, a predominantly monophagous insect-plant association widespread on the Atlantic Macaronesian islands. Phylogenetic reconciliation analysis suggests high levels of parallel cladogenesis between legumes and psyllids. However, dating using molecular clocks calibrated on known geological ages of the Macaronesian islands, reveals that the legume and psyllid radiations were not contemporaneous but sequential. Whereas the main plant radiation occurred some 8 million years ago, the insect radiation occurred about 3 million years ago. We estimate that more than 60% of the psyllid speciation results from host switching between related hosts. The only evidence for true cospeciation is in the much more recent and localized radiation of genistoid legumes in the Canary Islands, where the psyllid and legume radiations have been partially contemporaneous. The identification of specific cospeciation events over this time period however, is hindered by the phylogenetic uncertainty in both legume and psyllid phylogenies due to the apparent rapidity of the species radiations.
S862	J. E. E. Smedmark;T. Eriksson;R. C. Evans;C. S. Campbell	2003	Ancient Allopolyploid Speciation in Geinae (Rosaceae): Evidence from Nuclear granule-Bound Starch Synthase (GBSSI) Gene Sequences	Systematic Biology	52	3	374-385	10.1080/10635150390197000			A nuclear low copy gene phylogeny provides strong evidence for the hybrid origin of seven polyploid species in Geinae. In a gene tree, alleles at homoeologous loci in an allopolyploid species are expected to be sister to orthologues in its ancestral taxa rather than to each other. Alleles at a duplicated locus in an autopolyploid, on the other hand, are expected to be more closely related to each other than they are to any orthologous copies in closely related species. We cloned and sequenced about 1.9 kb from the 5' end of the GBSSI-1 gene from two diploid, one tetraploid and six hexaploid species. Each of the three loci in the hexaploid species forms a separate group of which two are more closely related to copies in other species than they are to each other. This indicates that the hexaploid lineage evolved through two consecutive allopolyploidisation events. Based on the GBSSI-1 gene tree we hypothesise an initial hybridisation between a diploid from the ancestral lineage of Coluria and Waldsteinia and an unknown diploid species, to form the tetraploid Geum heterocarpum lineage. Backcrossing of G. heterocarpum with a representative of the unknown diploid lineage, is suggested to have resulted in a hexaploid lineage that has radiated considerably since its origin, comprising at least 40 extant species with varying morphology. A Penalized likelihood analysis indicates that Geinae may be about 17 million years old, implying that the hypothesised allopolyploid speciation events are relatively ancient. Six of the 22 cloned Geinae GBSSI-1 copies in this study, which all are duplicate copies in polyploid taxa, may have become pseudogenes. The GBSSI-1 phylogeny is compared with one from chloroplast data, and implications for the evolution of some fruit characters are discussed.
S910	E. Susko;C. Field;C. Blouin;A. J. Roger	2003	Estimation of Rates-Across-Sites Distributions in Phylogenetic Substitution Models	Systematic Biology	52	5	594-603	10.1080/10635150390235395			Previous work has shown that it is often essential to account for the variation in rates at different sites in phylogenetic models in order to avoid phylogenetic artifacts such as long branch attraction. In most current models, the gamma distribution is used for the rates-across-sites distributions and is implemented as an equal-probability discrete gamma. In this paper, we introduce discrete distribution estimates with large numbers of equally spaced rate categories allowing us to investigate the appropriateness of the gamma model. With large numbers of rate categories, these discrete estimates are flexible enough to approximate the shape of almost any distribution. Likelihood ratio statistic tests and a nonparametric bootstrap confidence bound estimation procedure based on the discrete estimates are presented that can be used to test the fit of a parametric family. We apply the methodology to several different protein data sets and find that although the gamma model often provides a good parametric model for this type of data, rate estimates from an equal-probability discrete gamma model with a small number of categories will tend to underestimate the largest rates. In cases when the gamma model assumption is in doubt, rate estimates coming from the discrete rate distribution estimate with a large number of rate categories provide a robust alternative to gamma estimates. An alternative implementation of the gamma distribution is proposed that, for equal numbers of rate categories, is computationally more efficient during optimization than the standard gamma implementation and can provide more accurate estimates of site rates.
S912	Z. Yang;A. D. Yoder	2003	Comparison of Likelihood and Bayesian Methods for Estimating Divergence Times Using Multiple Gene Loci and Calibration Points, with Application to a Radiation of Cute-Looking Mouse Lemur Species	Systematic Biology	52	5	705-716	10.1080/10635150390235557			Divergence time and substitution rate are seriously confounded in phylogenetic analysis, making it difficult to estimate divergence times when the molecular clock (rate constancy among lineages) is violated. This problem can be alleviated to some extent by analyzing multiple gene loci simultaneously and by using multiple calibration points. While different genes may have different patterns of evolutionary rate change, they share the same divergence times. Indeed, the fact that each gene may violate the molecular clock differently leads to the advantage of simultaneous analysis of multiple loci. Multiple calibration points provide the means for characterizing the local evolutionary rates on the phylogeny. In this paper, we extend previous likelihood models of local molecular clock for estimating species divergence times to accommodate multiple calibration points and multiple genes. Heterogeneity among different genes in evolutionary rate and in substitution process is accounted for by the models. We apply the likelihood models to analyze two mitochondrial protein-coding genes, COII and cytochrome b, to estimate divergence times of Malagasy mouse lemurs and related outgroups. The likelihood method is compared with the Bayes method of Thorne et al. (1998), which uses a probabilistic model to describe the change of evolutionary rate over time and uses Markov chain Monte Carlo to derive the posterior distribution of rates and times. Our likelihood implementation has the drawbacks of failing to accommodate uncertainties in fossil calibrations and of requiring the researcher to classify branches on the tree into different rate groups. Both problems are naturally accommodated in the Bayes method. Despite the differences in the two methods, however, we found that data partitions and model assumptions had the greatest impact on date estimation. The three codon positions have very different substitution rates and evolutionary dynamics, and assumptions in the substitution model affect date estimation in both likelihood and Bayes analyses. When the three codon positions are analyzed simultaneously under the most realistic models using all available calibration information, the two methods produced similar results. The divergence of the mouse lemurs is dated to be around 7-10 million years ago, indicating a surprisingly early species radiation for such a morphologically uniform group of primates.
S1831	B. H. Jordal;G. M. Hewitt	2004	The origin and radiation of Macaronesian beetles breeding in Euphorbia: the relative importance of multiple data partitions and population sampling	Systematic Biology	53	5	711-734	10.1080/10635150490468710			Species-level phylogenies derived from many independent character sources and wide geographical sampling provide a powerful tool in assessing the importance of various factors associated with cladogenesis. In this study, we explore the relative importance of insular isolation and host plant switching in the diversification of a group of bark beetles (Curculionidae: Scolytinae) feeding and breeding in woody Euphorbia spurges. All species in the genus Aphanarthrum are each associated with only one species group of Euphorbia (succulents or one of three different arborescent groups), and the majority of species are endemic to one or several of the Macaronesian Islands. Hence, putative mechanisms of speciation could be assessed by identifying pairs of sister species in a phylogenetic analysis. We used DNA sequences from two nuclear and two mitochondrial genes, and morphological characters, to reconstruct the genealogical relationships among 92 individuals of 25 species and subspecies of Aphanarthrum and related genera. A stable tree topology was highly dependent on multiple character sources, but much less so on wide population sampling. However, multiple samples per species demonstrated one case of species paraphyly, as well as deep coalescence among three putative subspecies pairs. The phylogenetic analyses consistently placed the arborescent breeding and W-AfricanÑLanzarote distributed species A. armatum in the most basal position in Aphanarthrum, rendering this genus paraphyletic with respect to Coleobothrus. Two major radiations followed, one predominantly African lineage of succulent feeding species, and one island radiation associated with arborescent host plants. Sister comparisons showed that most recent divergences occurred in allopatry on closely related hosts, with subsequent expansions obscuring more ancient events. Only 6 out of 24 cladogenetic events were associated with host switching, rendering geographical factors more important in recent diversification.
S1020	C. P. Lin;B. N. Danforth;T. K. Wood	2004	Molecular phylogenetics and evolution of maternal care in membracine treehoppers	Systematic Biology	53	3	400-421	10.1080/10635150490445869			The treehopper subfamily Membracinae (Insecta: Hemiptera: Membracidae) comprises the majority of genera and species diversity in the New World tropics. These treehoppers exhibit a wide range of social behaviors making them an excellent group for studying patterns of social evolution in insects. However, to date the tribal and generic relationships have remained unclear. We reconstructed the phylogeny of the Membracinae using a combined mitochondrial (COI, COII, tRNA-Leu, and 12S) and nuclear (Wg) gene data set. 2608 aligned nucleotide sites were obtained for 112 species representing 25 of 38 currently recognized genera and all four tribes. A strict consensus of five equally parsimonious trees recovered the subfamily and three of its four tribes. The majority rule consensus tree derived from the Bayesian analyses based on the GTR+I+G and mixed-models recovered many clades shared with the parsimony trees and is identical to the single best tree inferred from maximum likelihood analysis, aside from the rearrangement of one node. A comparison of mitochondrial and nuclear genes indicated that Wg provided higher consistency index (CI), data decisiveness (DD), partitioned Bremer support (PBS) than any of the mitochondrial genes analyzed. The combined mitochondrial and nuclear DNA provide strong support for the monophyly of the subfamily and three of its four tribes (Aconophorini, Hoplophorionini and Hypsoprorini). Membracini is paraphyletic with respect to Hoplophorionini and contains two lineages, the Membracini sensu strictu and the newly resurrected tribe Bolbonotini. Our analyses show that there is a strong phylogenetic component to the evolution of maternal care. Given the widespread occurrence of maternal care within the subfamily, this trait is estimated to have ≤ 3 origins, two reversals, and one loss. Our results suggest that the evolution of maternal care in insects may not be as evolutionarily labile as previously thought.
S1205	D. Pisani	2004	Identifying and Removing Fast Evolving Sites Using Compatibility Analysis: An Example from the Arthropoda	Systematic Biology	53	6	983-994	10.1080/10635150490888877			N/A
S1041	S. G. Razafimandimbison;E. A. Kellogg;B. Bremer	2004	Recent Origin and Phylogenetic Utility of Divergent ITS Putative Pseudogenes: A Case Study from Naucleeae (Rubiaceae)	Systematic Biology	53	2	177-192	10.1080/10635150490423278			The internal transcribed spacer (ITS) of nrDNA has been widely used by systematists for reconstructing phylogenies of closely related taxa. While the occurrence of ITS putative pseudogenes is well documented for many groups of animals and plants, their potential utility in phylogenetic analyses has often been underestimated or even ignored in part because of deletions that make them difficult to align unambiguously. In addition, their long branches often can lead to spurious relationships, particularly in parsimony analyses. We have discovered unusually high levels of ITS polymorphism (up to 30%, 40%, and 14%, respectively) in three tropical tree species of the coffee family (Rubiaceae), Adinauclea fagifolia, Haldina cordifolia, and Mitragyna rubrostipulata. Both secondary structure stability and patterns of nucleotide substitutions in a highly conserved region (5.8S gene) are used for distinguishing presumed functional sequences from putative pseudogenes. We find that the combination of both criteria is the most powerful approach. The sequences from A. fagifolia appear to be a mix of functional genes and highly distinct putative pseudogenes, whereas those from H. cordifolia and M. rubrostipulata are identified as putative pseudogenes. We explore the potential utility of the identified putative pseudogenes in the phylogenetic analyses of Naucleeae sensu lato. Both Bayesian and parsimony trees identify the same monophyletic groups and show that the polymorphisms do not transcend species boundaries, implying that they do not predate the divergence of these three species. Furthermore, the resulting trees are similar to those produced in previous studies by analysis of chloroplast genes. In contrast to previous studies, therefore, divergent putative pseudogenes can be useful for phylogenetic analyses, especially, when no sequences of their functional counterparts are available. Our studies clearly show that ITS polymorphism may not necessarily mislead phylogenetic inference. Despite using many different PCR conditions (different primers, higher denaturing temperatures, and absence or presence of DMSO and BSA-TMACl), we recovered only a few functional ITS copies from A. fagifolia and none from H. cordifolia and M. rubrostipulata. We conclude that PCR selection may be occurring and/or the presumed functional alleles are located in minor loci (with few rDNA copies).
S1165	G. M. Schneeweiss;P. Schoenswetter;S. Kelso;H. Niklfeld	2004	Complex Biogeographic Patterns in Androsace (Primulaceae) and Related Genera: Evidence from Phylogenetic Analyses of Nuclear Internal Transcribed Spacer and Plastid trnL-F Sequences	Systematic Biology	53	6	856-876	10.1080/10635150490522566			We conducted phylogenetic analyses of Androsace and the closely related genera Douglasia, Pomatosace, and Vitaliana using DNA-sequences of the nuclear internal transcribed spacer (ITS) and the plastid trnL-F-region. Analyses using maximum parsimony and Bayesian inference yield congruent relationships among several major lineages found. These lineages largely disagree with previously recognized taxonomic groups. Most notably, (1) Androsace sect. Andraspis, comprising the short-lived taxa, is highly polyphyletic, (2) Pomatosace constitutes a separate phylogenetic lineage within Androsace, and (3) Douglasia and Vitaliana nest within Androsace sect. Aretia. Our results suggest multiple origins of the short-lived life-form and a possible reversal from annual or biennial to perennial habit at the base of a group that now contains mostly perennial high mountain or arctic taxa. The group containing Androsace sect. Aretia, Douglasia, and Vitaliana includes predominantly high alpine and arctic taxa with an arctic-alpine distribution, but is not found in the European and northeastern American Arctic or in Central and East Asia. This group probably originated in Europe in the Pliocene, from where it reached the amphi-Beringian region in the Pleistocene or late Pliocene.
S1044	S. J. Steppan;R. M. Adkins;J. Anderson	2004	Phylogeny and divergence-date estimates of rapid radiations in muroid rodents based on multiple nuclear genes	Systematic Biology	53	4	533-553	10.1080/10635150490468701			The muroid rodents are the largest superfamily of mammals, containing nearly 1/3 of all mammal species. We report on a phylogenetic study comprising 53 genera sequenced for four nuclear genes, GHR, BRCA1, RAG1, and c-myc, totaling up to 6,400 nucleotides. Most relationships among the subfamilies are resolved. All four genes yield nearly identical phylogenies, differing only in five key regions, four of which may represent particularly rapid radiations. Support is very strong for a fundamental division of the mole rats of the subfamilies Spalacinae and Rhizomyinae from all other muroids. Among the other core muroids, a rapid radiation led to at least four distinct lineages: Asian Calomyscus, an African clade of at least four endemic subfamilies including the diverse Nesomyinae of Madagascar, a hamster clade with maximum diversity in the New World, and an Old World clade including gerbils and the diverse Old World mice and rats (Murinae). The Deomyinae, recently removed from the Murinae, is well supported as the sister group to the gerbils (Gerbillinae). Four key regions appear to represent rapid radiations and, despite a large amount of sequence data, remain poorly resolved: the base of the core muroids, among the five cricetid (hamster) subfamilies, within a large clade of Sigmodontinae endemic to South America, and among major geographic lineages of Old World Murinae. Because of the detailed taxon sampling within the Murinae, we are able to refine the fossil calibration of a rate-smoothed molecular clock and apply this clock to date key events in muroid evolution. We calculate rate differences among the gene regions and relate those differences to relative contribution of each gene to the support for various nodes. The among-gene variance in support is greatest for the shortest branches. We present a revised classification for this largest but most unsettled mammalian superfamily.
S1166	T. M. Townsend;A. Larson;E. Louis;J. R. Macey	2004	Molecular phylogentics of Squamata: The position of snakes, amphisbaenians, and dibamids, and the root of the squamate tree	Systematic Biology	53	5	735-757	10.1080/10635150490522340			Squamate reptiles (snakes, lizards, and amphisbaenians) serve as model systems for evolutionary studies of a variety of morphological and behavioral traits, and phylogeny is crucial to many generalizations derived from such studies. Specifically, the traditional dichotomy between Iguania (anoles, iguanas, chameleons, etc.) and Scleroglossa (skinks, gekkos, snakes, etc.) has been correlated with major evolutionary shifts within Squamata. We present a molecular phylogenetic study of 69 squamate species using approximately 4600 (2876 parsimony-informative) base pairs (bp) of DNA sequence data from the nuclear genes RAG-1 (~2750 bp) and c-mos (~360 bp) and the mitochondrial ND2 region (~1500 bp), sampling all major clades and most major subclades. Under our hypothesis, species previously placed in Iguania, Anguimorpha, and almost all recognized squamate families form strongly supported monophyletic groups. However, species previously placed in Scleroglossa, Varanoidea, and several other higher taxa do not form monophyletic groups. Iguania, the traditional sister group of Scleroglossa, is actually highly nested within Scleroglossa. This unconventional rooting does not seem to be due to long-branch attraction, base composition biases among taxa, or convergence caused by similar selective forces acting on non-sister taxa. Studies of functional tongue morphology and feeding mode have contrasted the similar states found in Sphenodon (the nearest outgroup to squamates) and Iguania with those of Scleroglossa, but our findings suggest that similar states in Sphenodon and Iguania result from homoplasy. Snakes, amphisbaenians, and dibamid lizards, limbless forms whose phylogenetic positions historically have been impossible to place with confidence, are not grouped together and appear to have evolved this condition independently. Amphisbaenians are the sister group of lacertids, and dibamid lizards diverged early in squamate evolutionary history. Snakes are grouped with iguanians, lacertiforms and anguimorphs, but are not nested within anguimorphs.
S962	J. M. Waters;M. S. Roy	2004	Out of Africa: the slow train to Australasia	Systematic Biology	53	1	18-24	10.1080/10635150490264671			We used mitochondrial DNA sequences to test biogeographic hypotheses for Patiriella exigua (Asterinidae), one of the world's most widespread coastal sea-stars. This small intertidal species has an entirely benthic life-history and yet occurs in southern temperate waters of the Atlantic, Indian and Pacific oceans. Despite its abundance around southern Africa, south-eastern Australia, and several oceanic islands, P. exigua is absent from the shores of Western Australia, New Zealand, and South America. Phylogenetic analysis of mtDNA sequences (COI, control region) indicates that South Africa houses an assemblage of P. exigua that is not monophyletic (P = 0.04), whereas Australian and Lord Howe Island specimens comprise an interior monophyletic group. The placement of the root in Africa, and small genetic divergences (1.1-1.9%) between eastern African and Australian haplotypes, strongly suggests Pleistocene dispersal eastwards across the Indian Ocean. Dispersal was probably achieved by rafting on wood or macroalgae, facilitated by the West Wind Drift. Genetic data also support Pleistocene colonisation of oceanic islands (Lord Howe Island, Amsterdam Island, St Helena). Although many biogeographers have speculated about the role of long-distance rafting, this study is one of the first to provide convincing evidence. The marked phylogeographic structure evident across small geographic scales in Australia and South Africa indicates that gene flow among populations may be generally insufficient to prevent the local evolution of monophyly. We suggest that P. exigua may rely on passive mechanisms of dispersal.
S1460	R. J. Asher;M. Hofreiter	2005	Tenrec Phylogeny and the Noninvasive Extraction of Nuclear DNA	Systematic Biology	55	2	181-194	10.1080/10635150500433649			Due in part to scarcity of material, no published study has yet cladistically addressed the systematics of living and fossil Tenrecidae (Mammalia, Afrotheria). Using a noninvasive technique for sampling nuclear DNA from museum specimens, we investigate the evolution of the Tenrecidae and assess the extent to which tenrecids fit patterns of relationships proposed for other terrestrial mammals on Madagascar. Application of several tree-reconstruction techniques on sequences of the nuclear Growth Hormone Receptor gene and morphological data for all recognized tenrecid genera supports monophyly of Malagasy tenrecids to the exclusion of the two living African genera. However, both parsimony and Bayesian methods favor a close relationship between fossil African tenrecs and the Malagasy Geogale, supporting the hypothesis of island paraphyly, but not polyphyly. More generally, the non-invasive extraction technique can be applied with minimal risk to rare/unique specimens, and by better utilizing museum collections for genetic work can greatly mitigate field expenses and disturbance of natural populations.
S1430	H. Brinkmann;M. v d Giezen;Y. Zhou;G. P. d Raucourt;H. Philippe	2005	An empirical Assessment of Long Branch Attraction Artefacts in Deep Eukaryotic Phylogenomics	Systematic Biology	54	5	743-757	10.1080/10635150500234609			In the context of exponential growing molecular databases, it becomes increasingly easy to assemble large multigene datasets for phylogenomic studies. The expected increase of resolution due to the reduction of the sampling (stochastic) error is becoming a reality. However, the impact of systematic biases will also become more apparent or even dominant. We have chosen to study the case of the long branch attraction artefact (LBA) using real instead of simulated sequences. Two fast evolving eukaryotic lineages, whose evolutionary positions are well-established, microsporidia and the nucleomorph of cryptophytes, were chosen as model species. A large dataset was assembled (44 species, 133 genes and 24,294 amino acid positions) and the resulting rooted eukaryotic phylogeny (using a distant archaeal outgroup) is positively misled by an LBA artefact despite the use of a maximum likelihood based tree reconstruction method with a complex model of sequence evolution. When the fastest evolving proteins from the fast lineages are progressively removed (up to 90%), the bootstrap support for the apparently artefactual basal placement decreases to virtually 0%, and conversely only the expected placement, among all the possible locations of the fast evolving species, receives increasing support that eventually converges to 100%. The percentage of removal of the fastest evolving proteins constitutes a reliable estimate of the sensitivity of phylogenetic inference to LBA. This protocol confirms that both a rich species sampling (especially the presence of a species that is closely related to the fast evolving lineage) and a probabilistic method with a complex model are important to overcome the LBA artefact. Finally, we observed that phylogenetic inference methods perform strikingly better with simulated as opposed to real data, and suggest that testing the reliability of phylogenetic inference methods with simulated data leads to overconfidence in their performance. Although phylogenomic studies can be affected by systematic biases, the possibility of discarding a large amount of data containing most of the non-phylogenetic signal allows recovering a phylogeny that is less affected by systematic biases, while maintaining a high statistical support.
S1383	A. G. Collins;P. Schuchert;A. C. Marques;T. Jankowski;M. Medina;B. Schierwater	2005	Medusozoan phylogeny and character evolution clarified by new large and small subunit rDNA data and an assessment of the utility of phylogenetic mixture models	Systematic Biology	55	1	97-115	10.1080/10635150500433615			A newly compiled dataset of nearly complete sequences of the large subunit of the nuclear ribosome (LSU or 28S) sampled from 31 diverse medusozoans greatly clarifies the phylogenetic history of Cnidaria. These data have substantial power to discern among many of the competing hypotheses of relationship derived from prior work. Moreover, LSU data provide strong support at key nodes that were equivocal based on other molecular markers. Combining LSU sequences with those of the small subunit of the nuclear ribosome (SSU or 18S), we present a detailed working hypothesis of medusozoan relationships and discuss character evolution within this diverse clade. Stauromedusae, comprising the benthic, so-called „stalked jellyfish‰, appears to be the sister group of all other medusozoans, implying that the free-swimming medusa stage, the motor nerve net, and statocysts of ecto-endodermal origin are features derived within Medusozoa. Cubozoans, which have had uncertain phylogenetic affinities since the elucidation of their life cycles, form a clade -- named Acraspeda -- with the scyphozoan groups Coronatae, Rhizostomeae, and Semaeostomeae. The polyps of both cubozoans and hydrozoans appear to be secondarily simplified. Hydrozoa is comprised by two well-supported clades, Trachylina and Hydroidolina. The position of Limnomedusae within Trachylina indicates that the ancestral hydrozoan had a biphasic life cycle and that the medusa was formed via an entocodon. Recently hypothesized homologies between the entocodon and bilaterian mesoderm are therefore suspect. Laingiomedusae, which has often been viewed as a close ally of the trachyline group Narcomedusae, is instead shown to be unambiguously a member of Hydroidolina. The important model organisms of the Hydra species complex are part of a clade, Aplanulata, with other hydrozoans possessing direct development not involving a ciliated planula stage. Finally, applying phylogenetic mixture models to our data proved to be of little additional value over a more traditional phylogenetic approach involving explicit hypothesis testing and bootstrap analyses under multiple optimality criteria.
S1345	S. Creer;C. E. Pook;A. Malhotra;R. S. Thorpe	2006	Optimal Intron Analyses in the Trimeresurus Radiation of Asian Pitvipers	Systematic Biology	55	1	57-72	10.1080/10635150500431213			Nuclear introns are commonly used as phylogenetic markers, but a number of issues related to alignment strategies, indel treatments and the incorporation of length variant heterozygotes (LVHs) are not routinely addressed when generating phylogenetic hypotheses. Topological congruence in relation to an extensive mitochondrial DNA multigene phylogeny (derived from 2423 b.p. of 12S, 16S, ND4 and CYTB genes) of the Asian pitviper Trimeresurus radiation was used to compare combinations of „by eye‰ and ClustalX 1.8 assisted alignments of two nuclear introns. Indels were treated as missing data, fifth character states and assigned simple and multistate codes. Upon recovery of the optimal alignment and indel treatment strategy, a total evidence approach was used to investigate the phylogenetic utility of the indels and test new generic arrangements within Trimeresurus. Approximately one third of the intron data partitions exhibited LVHs suggesting that they are common in introns. Furthermore, a simple concatenation approach can facilitate the incorporation of LVHs into phylogenetic analyses to make use of all available data and investigate mechanisms of molecular evolution. Analyses of ClustalX 1.8 assisted alignments were generally more congruent than the „by eye‰ alignment and the analysis of a simple coded, ClustalX 1.8 (gap opening cost 5, gap extension cost 1) alignment revealed the most congruent tree. The total evidence approach supported the new arrangements within Trimeresurus suggesting that the phylogeny should be considered as a working benchmark in Asian pitviper systematics. Finally, a critical appraisal of the diverse array of indels (56--57 per intron, ranging from 1--151 b.p. in length) suggested that they are a combination of homologous and homoplasious events unrelated to indel size or location within the intron.
S1255	P. Gaubert;W. C. Wozencraft;P. Cordeiro-Estrela;G. Veron	2005	Mosaics of Convergences, Noise and Misleading Morphological Phylogenies: what's in a Viverrid-like Carnivoran?	Systematic Biology	54	6	865-894	10.1080/10635150500232769			Adaptive convergence in morphological characters has been considered responsible for incorrect reconstruction of evolutionary history between taxa. However, convergence patterns have rarely been thoroughly investigated, and the processes by which phylogenetic relationships may be misled by morphological convergence remains unclear. To further explore convergence characterization, we undertook a case study on the morphological evolution of viverrid-like feliformians (Nandinia, Cryptoprocta, Fossa, Eupleres, Prionodon). These taxa have a history of little systematic agreement despite extensive morphological investigations, but recent molecular phylogenetic analyses suggest that viverrid-like morphotypes appeared at least three times independently during feliformian evolution. We built the largest morphological matrix concerning the Suborder Feliformia to date: a total of 349 characters grouped into four anatomical partitions for all species of Viverridae and viverrid-like taxa plus representatives of the Felidae, Hyaenidae, Herpestidae, and one Malagasy mongoose. We evaluated phylogenetic signal, convergence and noise in morphological characters through several approaches, most of which done in the framework of a synthetic molecular tree: (a) tree-length distribution (g1), (b) partitioned Bremer support, (c) RI values and their distribution, (d) respective contributions of diagnostic synapomorphies at the nodes for each partition, (e) patterns of shared convergences among viverrid-like taxa and other feliformian lineages, (f) tree-length differences among alternative hypotheses, and (g) successive removal of convergent character states from the original matrix. In addition, the lability of complex morphological structures was assessed by mapping them onto the synthetic molecular tree. The unconstrained morphological analysis yielded phylogenetic groupings that closely reflected traditional classification. Most of the nodes in the morphological tree were poorly supported, and conflicted with the DNA-based tree topology. The use of a synthetic molecular tree (constraint) combined with our thorough morphological investigations revealed the mosaics of convergences likely to have contributed to the historical uncertainty over viverrid classification. It also exemplified that complex morphological structures could be submitted to reversible evolutionary trends. On the other hand, the morphological matrix proved useful in characterizing several feliformian clades with diagnostic synapomorphies. These results support the classification of viverrid-like taxa into three distinct families: Nandiniidae (Nandinia), Prionodontidae (Prionodon), and the newly defined Eupleridae (including Cryptoprocta, Fossa, Eupleres plus all „mongoose-like‰ Malagasy taxa). No clearly „phylogenetically misleading‰ data subsets could be identified, and the great majority of morphological convergences appeared to be non-adaptive. The multiple approaches used in this study revealed that the most disruptive element with regards to morphological phylogenetic reconstruction was noise, which blured the expression of phylogenetic signal. This study demonstrates the crucial need to consider independent (molecular) phylogenies in order to produce reliable evolutionary hypotheses and should promote a new approach of the definition of morphological characters in mammals.
S1413	T. Huyse;F. A. M. Volckaert	2005	Comparing Host and Parasite Phylogenies: Gyrodactylus Flatworms Jumping from Goby to Goby	Systematic Biology	54	5	710-718	10.1080/10635150500221036			The combination of exceptionally high species diversity, high host specificity and complex reproduction system raises many questions about the underlying mechanisms triggering speciation in the flatworm genus Gyrodactylus. The coevolutionary history with their goby hosts was investigated using both topology- and distance-based approaches; phylogenies were constructed of the V4 region of the 18S rRNA and the complete ITS rDNA region for the parasites, and 12S and 16S mtDNA fragments for the hosts. The overall fit between both trees was significant according to the topology-based programs (TreeMap 1.0, 2.0? and TreeFitter), but not according to the timed analysis in TreeMap 2.0? and the distance based method (ParaFit). An absolute timing of speciation events in host and parasite ruled out the possibility of synchronous speciation for the gill parasites, favouring the distance-based result. Based on this information together with the biological background of host and parasite, the following TreeMap solution was selected. The group of gill parasites evolved from a host switch from G. arcuatus, parasitizing the three-spined stickleback onto the gobies, followed by several host-switching events among the respective goby hosts. The timing of these events is estimated to date back to the Late Pleistocene, suggesting a role for refugia-mediated mixing of parasite species. In contrast, it is suggested that cospeciation in the fin-parasites resulted in several host-associated species complexes. This illustrates that phylogenetically conserved host-switching mimics the phylogenetic signature of cospeciation, confounding topology-based programs.
S1386	S. A. Jansa;F. K. Barker;L. R. Heaney	2006	The pattern and timing of diversification of Philippine endemic rodents: evidence from mitochondrial and nuclear gene sequences	Systematic Biology	55	1	73-88	10.1080/10635150500431254			The 22 genera and 64 species of rodents (Muridae: Murinae) distributed in the Philippine Islands provide a unique opportunity to study patterns and processes of diversification in island systems. Over 90% of these rodent species are endemic to the archipelago, but the relative importance of dispersal from the mainland, dispersal within the archipelago, and in situ differentiation as explanations of this diversity remains unclear, as no phylogenetic hypothesis for these species and relevant mainland forms is currently available. Here we report the results of phylogenetic analyses of the endemic Philippine murines and a wide sampling of murine diversity from outside the archipelago, based on the mitochondrial cytochrome b gene and the nuclear-encoded IRBP exon 1. Analysis of our combined gene dataset consistently identified five clades comprising endemic Philippine genera, suggesting multiple invasions of the archipelago. Molecular dating analyses using parametric and semi-parametric methods suggest that colonization occurred in at least two stages, one ca. 15 Ma, and another 8-12 million years later, consistent with the previous recognition of „Old‰ and „New‰ endemic rodent faunas. Ancestral area analysis suggests that the Old Endemics invaded landmasses that are now part of the island of Luzon, whereas the three New Endemic clades may have colonized through either Mindanao, Luzon, or both. Further, our results suggest that most of the diversification of Philippine murines took place within the archipelago. Despite heterogeneity between nuclear and mitochondrial genes in most model parameters, combined analysis of the two data sets using both parsimony and likelihood increased phylogenetic resolution; however, the effect of data combination on support for resolved nodes was method-dependent. In contrast, our results suggest that combination of mitochondrial and nuclear data to estimate relatively ancient divergence times can severely compromise those estimates, even when specific methods that account for rate heterogeneity among genes are employed.
S1257	M. Kennedy;B. R. Holland;R. D. Gray;H. G. Spencer	2005	Untangling long branches: Identifying conflicting phylogenetic signals using spectral analysis, Neighbor-Net, and consensus networks	Systematic Biology	54	4	620-633	10.1080/106351591007462			Long-branch attraction is a well known source of systematic error that can mislead phylogenetic methods, it is frequently invoked posthoc, upon recovering a different tree to the one expected based on prior evidence. We demonstrate that methods that do not force the data onto a single tree, such as spectral analysis, Neighbor-Net, and consensus networks, can be used to detect conflicting signals within the data, including those caused by long-branch attraction. We illustrate this approach using a set of taxa from three unambiguously monophyletic families within the Pelecaniformes: the darters, the cormorants and shags, and the gannets and boobies. These three families are universally acknowledged as forming a monophyletic group, but the relationship between the families remains contentious. Using sequence data from three mitochondrial genes (12S, ATPase 6, and ATPase 8) we demonstrate that the relationship between these three families is difficult to resolve because they are separated by a short internal branch and there are conflicting signals due to long-branch attraction that are confounded with non-homogeneous sequence evolution across the different genes. Spectral analysis, Neighbor-Net, and consensus networks reveal conflicting signals regarding the placement of one of the darters, with support found for darter monophyly, but also support for a conflicting grouping with the outgroup, pelicans. Furthermore, parsimony and maximum-likelihood analyses produced different trees, with one of the two most parsimonious trees not supporting the monophyly of the darters. Monte-Carlo simulations, however, were not sensitive enough to reveal long-branch attraction unless the branches are longer than those actually observed. These results indicate that spectral analysis, Neighbor-Net, and consensus networks offer a powerful approach to detecting, and understanding the source of, conflicting signals within phylogenetic data.
S1388	N. Lartillot;H. Philippe	2006	Computing Bayes Factors Using Thermodynamic Integration	Systematic Biology	55	2	195-207	10.1080/10635150500433722			In the Bayesian paradigm, a common method for comparing two models is to compute the Bayes factor, defined as the ratio of their respective marginal likelihoods. In recent phylogenetic works, the numerical evaluation of marginal likelihoods has often been performed using the harmonic mean estimation procedure. In the present paper, we propose to employ another method, based on an analogy with statistical physics, called thermodynamic integration. We describe the method, propose an implementation, and show on two analytical examples that this numerical method yields reliable estimates. In contrast, the harmonic mean estimator leads to a strong over-estimation of the marginal likelihood, which is all the more pronounced as the model is higher-dimensional. As a result, the harmonic mean estimator systematically favors more parameter-rich models, an artefact which might explain some recent puzzling observations, based on harmonic mean estimates, suggesting that Bayes factors tend to overscore complex models. Finally, we apply our method to the comparison of several alternative models of amino-acid replacement. We confirm our previous observations, indicating that modeling pattern heterogeneity across sites tends to yield better models than standard empirical matrices.
S1389	C. Poux;P. Chevret;D. Huchon;W. W. d Jong;E. J. P. Douzery	2006	Arrival and diversification of caviomorph rodents and platyrrhine primates in South America	Systematic Biology	55	2	228-244	10.1080/10635150500481390			Platyrrhine primates and caviomorph rodents are clades of mammals that colonized South America during its period of isolation from the other continents, between 100 and 3 million years ago (MYA). Until now, no molecular study investigated the timing of the South American colonization by these two lineages with the same molecular data set. Using sequences from three nuclear genes (ADRA2B, vWF and IRBP, both separate and combined) from 60 species, and eight fossil calibration constraints, we estimated the times of origin and diversification of platyrrhines and caviomorphs via a Bayesian relaxed molecular clock approach. To account for the possible effect of an accelerated rate of evolution of the IRBP gene along the branch leading to the anthropoids, we performed the datings with and without IRBP (3,768 bp and 2,469 bp, respectively). The time window for the colonization of South America by primates and by rodents is demarcated by the dates of origin (upper bound) and radiation (lower bound) of platyrrhines and caviomorphs. According to this approach, platyrrhine primates colonized South America between 37.0 ± 3.0 MYA (or 38.9 ± 4.0 MYA without IRBP) and 16.8 ± 2.3 (or 20.1 ± 3.3) MYA, and caviomorph rodents between 45.4 ± 4.1 (or 43.7 ± 4.8) MYA and 36.7 ± 3.7 (or 35.8 ± 4.3) MYA. Considering both the fossil record and these molecular datings, the favored scenarios are a trans-Atlantic migration of primates from Africa at the end of the Eocene or beginning of the Oligocene, and a colonization of South America by rodents during the Middle or Late Eocene. Based on our nuclear DNA data, we cannot rule out the possibility of a concomitant arrival of primates and rodents in South America. The caviomorphs radiated soon after their arrival, before the Oligocene glaciations, and these early caviomorph lineages persisted until the present. By contrast, few platyrrhine fossils are known in the Oligocene and the present-day taxa are the result of a quite recent, Early Miocene diversification.
S1301	C. Poux;O. Madsen;E. Marquard;D. R. Vieites;W. W. d Jong;M. Vences	2005	Asynchronous colonization of Madagascar by the four endemic clades of primates, tenrecs, carnivores and rodents as inferred from nuclear genes	Systematic Biology	54	5	719-730	10.1080/10635150500234534			Madagascar harbors four large adaptive radiations of endemic terrestrial mammals: lemurs, tenrecs, carnivorans and rodents. These rank among the most spectacular examples of evolutionary diversification, but their monophyly and origins are debated. The lack of Tertiary fossils from Madagascar leaves molecular studies as most promising to solve these controversies. We provide a simultaneous reconstruction of phylogeny and age of the four radiations based on a 3.5-kb data set from three nuclear genes (ADRA2B, vWF and AR). The analysis supports each as a monophyletic clade, sister to African taxa, and thereby identifies four events of colonization out of Africa. To infer the time windows for colonization we take into account both the divergence from the closest non-insular sister group and the initial intra-insular radiation, which is a novel but conservative approach in studies of the colonization history of Madagascar. We estimate that lemurs colonized Madagascar between 60 million years ago (mya) (split from lorises) and 50 mya (lemur radiation) (70-41 mya taking 95% credibility intervals into account), tenrecs between 42 and 25 mya (50-20 mya), carnivorans between 26 and 19 mya (33-14 mya) and rodents between 24 and 20 mya (30-15 mya). These datings suggest at least two asynchronous colonization events: by lemurs in the Late Cretaceous-Middle Eocene, and by carnivorans and rodents in the Early Oligocene-Early Miocene. The colonization by tenrecs may have taken place simultaneously with either these two events, or in a third event in the Late Eocene-Oligocene. Colonization by at least lemurs, rodents and carnivorans appears to have occurred by overseas rafting rather than via a land bridge hypothesized to have existed between 45 and 26 mya, but the second scenario cannot be ruled out if credibility intervals are taken into account.
S1403	L. Rüber;R. Britz;R. Zardoya	2006	Molecular phylogenetics and evolutionary diversification of labyrinth fishes (Perciformes; Anabantoidei)	Systematic Biology	55	3	374-397	10.1080/10635150500541664			Labyrinth fishes (Perciformes: Anabantoidei) are primary freshwater fishes with a disjunct African-Asian distribution that exhibit a wide variety of morphological and behavioral traits. These intrinsic features make them particularly well suited for studying patterns and processes of evolutionary diversification. We reconstructed the first molecular-based phylogenetic hypothesis of anabantoid intrarelationships using both mitochondrial and nuclear nucleotide sequence data to address anabantoid evolution. The mitochondrial data set included the complete cytochrome b, partial 12S rRNA, complete tRNA Val, and partial 16S rRNA genes (3340 bp) of 57 species representing all 19 anabantoid genera. The nuclear data set included the partial RAG1 gene (1473 bp) of 21 representative species. The phylogenetic analyses of a combined (mitochondrial + nuclear) data set recovered almost fully resolved trees at the intrafamily level with different methods of phylogenetic inference. Phylogenetic relationships at this taxonomic level were compared with previous morphology-based hypotheses. In particular, the enigmatic pike-head (Luciocephalus) was confidently placed within the „spiral egg‰ clade, thus resolving the long-standing controversy on its relative phylogenetic position. The molecular phylogeny was used to study the evolution of the different forms of parental care within the suborder. Our results suggest that the evolution of breeding behavior in anabantoids is highly correlated with phylogeny, and that brood care evolved three times independently from an ancestral free spawning condition without parental care. Ancestral character state reconstructions under maximum parsimony and maximum likelihood further indicated that both bubble nesting and mouthbrooding have evolved recurrently during anabantoid evolution. The new phylogenetic framework was also used to test alternative biogeographic hypotheses that account for the disjunct African ˆ Asian distribution. Molecular divergence time estimates support either a drift vicariance linked to the breakup of Gondwana or Late Mesozoic Early Tertiary dispersal from Africa to Asia. [ancestral character state reconstruction; breeding behavior; divergence time estimation; biogeography]
S1354	T. H. Struck;G. Purschke;K. M. Halanych	2006	Phylogeny of Eunicida (Annelida) and Exploring Data Congruence using a Partition Addition Bootstrap Alteration (PABA) Approach	Systematic Biology	55	1	1-20	10.1080/10635150500354910			Even though relationships within Annelida are poorly understood, Eunicida is one of only a few major annelid lineages well supported by morphology. The 7 recognized eunicid families possess sclerotized jaws that include mandibles and a maxillary apparatus. The maxillary apparatuses vary in shape and number of elements, and three main types are recognized in extant taxa: ctenognath, labidognath and prionognath. Ctenognath jaws are usually considered to represent the plesiomorphic state of Eunicida, whereas taxa with labidognath and prionognath are thought to form a derived monophyletic assemblage. However, this hypothesis has never been tested in a statistical framework even though it holds considerable importance for understanding annelid phylogeny and possibly lophotrochozoan evolution because Eunicida has the best annelid fossil record. Therefore, we used maximum likelihood and Bayesian inference approaches to reconstruct Eunicida phylogeny using sequence data from nuclear 18S and 28S rDNA genes and mitochondrial 16S rDNA and cytochrome c oxidase subunit I genes. Additionally, we conducted three different tests to investigate suitability of combining data sets. Incongruence Length Difference (ILD) and Shimodaira-Hasegawa (SH) test comparisons of resultant trees under different data partitions have been widely used previously, but do not give a good indication as to which nodes may be causing the conflict. Thus, we developed a Partition Addition Bootstrap Alteration (PABA) approach that evaluates congruence or conflict for any given node by determining how bootstrap scores are altered when different data partitions are added. PABA shows the contribution of each partition to the phylogeny obtained in the combined analysis. Generally the ILD test performed worse than the other approaches in detecting incongruence. Both PABA and the SH approach indicated the 28S and COI data sets add conflicting signal, but PABA is more informative for elucidating which data partition may be misleading a given node. All our analyses indicate that the monophyly of the labidognath/prionognath taxa and even a labidognath clade (i.e., a „Eunicidae‰/Onuphidae/Lumbrineridae clade) is significantly rejected. We show that the definition of both the labidognath and ctenognath jaw type does not address adequately the variation within Eunicida and thus misleads our current evolutionary understanding. Based on the presented results a symmetric maxillary apparatus with a carrier and 4 to 6 maxillae is most likely the plesiomorphic condition for Eunicida.
S1237	D. W. Weisrock;L. J. Harmon;A. Larson	2005	Resolving Deep Phylogenetic Relationships in Salamanders: Analyses of Mitochondrial and Nuclear Genomic Data	Systematic Biology	54	5	758-777	10.1080/10635150500234641			Phylogenetic relationships among salamander families illustrate analytical challenges inherent to inferring phylogenies in which terminal branches have a very long temporal duration relative to internal ones. To examine these relationships, we present new mitochondrial-DNA sequences, approximately 2100 base-pairs from the genes encoding ND1, ND2, COI, and the intervening tRNA genes for 34 species representing all 10 salamander families. Parsimony analysis of these mtDNA sequences supports monophyly of all families except Proteidae, but yields a tree largely unresolved with respect to interfamilial relationships and the phylogenetic positions of the proteid genera Necturus and Proteus. In contrast, Bayesian and maximum-likelihood analyses of the mtDNA data produce a topology concordant with phylogenetic results from nuclear-encoded rRNA sequences, and Bayesian posterior probabilities provide statistical support for interfamilial groupings that preclude monophyly of the internally fertilizing salamanders, suborder Salamandroidea. Bayesian analysis of mtDNA data strongly supports a clade containing the internally fertilizing families Ambystomatidae, Dicamptodontidae, Proteidae, and Salamandridae, and the externally fertilizing family Sirenidae; both molecular data sets strongly place all of these families in a clade excluding the internally fertilizing families Amphiumidae, Plethodontidae, and Rhyacotritonidae. These analyses also support monophyly of suborder Cryptobranchoidea (Cryptobranchidae and Hynobiidae), whose fertilization is external. Computer simulations and analyses of our data indicate that ancestral lineages shared by two or more families would need to have been at least 23 million years and in some cases much longer in duration for statistical recovery using parsimony, but that Bayesian methods may correctly infer groupings whose common ancestral lineage is shorter. Branch support for such nodes in our likelihood and Bayesian analyses of mtDNA derives largely from occurrence of a small number of relatively rare substitutions in categories heavily weighted by the favored evolutionary model. Our molecular phylogenetic results challenge the interpretation that internal-fertilization systems of salamandroid families are homologous and that functional burden precludes evolutionary loss of internal fertilization.
S1276	A. H. Wortley;P. J. Rudall;D. J. Harris;R. W. Scotland	2005	How Much Data are Needed to Resolve a Difficult Phylogeny? Case Study in Lamiales	Systematic Biology	54	5	697-709	10.1080/10635150500221028			Reconstructing phylogeny is a crucial target of contemporary biology, now commonly approached through computerised analysis of genetic sequence data. In angiosperms, despite recent progress at the ordinal level, many relationships between families remain unclear. Here we take a case study from Lamiales, an angiosperm order in which interfamilial relationships have so far proved particularly problematic. We analyse the effect of changing one factor ˆ the quantity of sequence data analysed ˆ on phylogeny reconstruction in this group. We use simulation to estimate a priori the sequence data that would be needed to resolve an accurate, supported phylogeny of Lamiales. We investigate the effect of increasing the length of sequence data analysed, the rate of substitution in the sequences used, and of combining gene partitions. This method could be a valuable technique for planning systematic investigations in other problematic groups. Our results suggest that increasing sequence length is a better way to improve support, resolution and accuracy than employing sequences with a faster substitution rate. Indeed the latter may in some cases have detrimental effects on phylogeny reconstruction. Further molecular sequencing ˆ of at least 10,000 bp ˆ should result in a fully-resolved and supported phylogeny of Lamiales, but at present the problematic aspects of this tree model remain.
S1287	C. W. Dunn;P. R. Pugh;S. H. D. Haddock	2005	Molecular phylogenetics of the Siphonophora (Cnidaria), with implications for the evolution of functional specialization	Systematic Biology	54	6	916-935	10.1080/10635150500354837			Siphonophores are a group of pelagic colonial hydrozoans (Cnidaria) that have long been of general interest because of the division of labor between the polyps and medusae that make up these superorganisms . These polyps and medusae are each homologous to free living forms of other Cnidaria but are generated by an incomplete asexual budding process that leaves them physiologically integrated. They are specialized for various tasks such as locomotion, feeding, reproduction, excretion, defense, and prey capture, and are precisely organized within each colony. The degree of functional specialization varies across taxa, and different authors have used this character to construct phylogenies polarized in opposite directions depending on whether they thought siphonophore evolution proceeded by a reduction or an increase in functional specialization. We have collected taxa across all major groups of siphonophores, many of which are found exclusively in the deep-sea, using remotely operated underwater vehicles (ROVs) and by SCUBA diving from ships in the open ocean. We have used these specimens, and several collected by manned submersible, to estimate the siphonophore phylogeny with molecular data from the nuclear small subunit ribosomal RNA gene (18S) and the mitochondrial large subunit ribosomal RNA gene (16S). We have found, based on these 52 siphonophores and 4 outgroup taxa, that there are no consistent trends towards increased or decreased functional specialization in siphonophores: functional classes of polyps and medusae have been gained and lost across the tree. These data also indicate that the common ancestor of siphonophores was dioecious, and are consistent with a single transition to monoecy. The present analysis also bears on several long-standing questions about siphonophore systematics. It indicates that the cystonects are sister to all other siphonophores, a group that we call the Codonophora. It is also found that the Calycophorae are nested within the physonects, and that the Brachystelia, a historically recognized grouping of short-stemmed taxa, are polyphyletic.
S1434	D. M. Althoff;K. A. Segraves;J. Leebens-Mack;O. Pellmyr	2006	Patterns of speciation in the yucca moths: parallel species radiations within the Tegeticula yuccasella species complex	Systematic Biology	55	3	398-410	10.1080/10635150600697325			The interaction between yuccas and yucca moths has been central to understanding the origin and loss of obligate mutualism and mutualism reversal. Previous systematic research using mtDNA sequence data and characters associated with genitalic morphology revealed that a widespread pollinator species in the genus Tegeticula was in fact a complex of pollinator species that differed in host use and the way they placed their eggs into yucca flowers. Within this mutualistic clade two non-pollinating Œcheater‚ species evolved. Cheaters feed on yucca seeds but lack the tentacular mouthparts necessary for yucca pollination. Previous work suggested that this species complex formed via a rapid radiation within the last several million years. In this study, we use an expanded mtDNA sequence dataset and AFLP markers to examine the phylogenetic relationships among this rapidly diverging clade of moths and compare these relationships to patterns in genitalic morphology. Topologies obtained from analyses of the mtDNA and AFLP data differed significantly. Both datasets, however, corroborated the hypothesis of a rapid species radiation, and suggested that there were likely two independent species radiations. Morphological analyses based on oviposition habit produced species groupings more similar to the AFLP topology than the mtDNA topology, and suggested the two radiations coincided with differences in oviposition habit. The evolution of cheating was reaffirmed to have evolved twice and the closest pollinating relative for one cheater species was identified by both mtDNA and AFLP markers. For the other cheater species, however, the closest pollinating relative remains ambiguous, and mtDNA, AFLP, and morphological data suggest this cheater species may be diverged based on host use. Much of the divergence in the species complex can be explained by geographic isolation associated with the evolution of two oviposition habits.
S1696	I. R. Arkhipova	2006	Distribution and phylogeny of Penelope-like elements in Eukaryotes	Systematic Biology	55	6	875-885	10.1080/10635150601077683			Penelope-like elements (PLEs) are a relatively little studied class of eukaryotic retroelements, distinguished by the presence of the GIY-YIG endonuclease domain, the ability of some representatives to retain introns, and the similarity of PLE-encoded reverse transcriptases to telomerases. While these retrotransposons are abundant in many animal genomes, the reverse transcriptase moiety can also be found in several protists, fungi, and plants, indicating its ancient origin. A comprehensive phylogenetic analysis of PLEs was conducted, based on extended sequence alignments and a considerably expanded dataset. PLEs exhibit the pattern of evolution similar to that of non-LTR retrotransposons, which form deep-branching clades dating back to the Precambrian era. However, PLEs seem to have experienced a much higher degree of lineage losses than non-LTR retrotransposons. It is suggested that PLEs and non-LTR retrotransposons are included into a larger eTPRT (eukaryotic target-primed) group of retroelements, characterized by 5' truncation, variable target-site duplication, and the potential of the 3' end to participate in formation of non-autonomous derivatives.
S1478	J. Buschbom;D. Barker	2006	Evolutionary History of Vegetative Reproduction in Porpidia s.l. (Lichen-forming Ascomycota)	Systematic Biology	55	3	471-484	10.1080/10635150600697465			The evolutionary history of gains and losses of vegetative reproductive propagules (soredia) in Porpidia s.l., a group of lichen-forming ascomycetes, was clarified using Bayesian Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) approaches to monophyly tests and a combined MCMC and maximum likelihood approach to ancestral character state reconstructions. The MCMC framework provided confidence estimates for the reconstructions of relationships and ancestral character states, which formed the basis for tests of evolutionary hypotheses. Monophyly tests rejected all hypotheses that predicted any clustering of reproductive modes in extant taxa. In addition, a nearest-neighbor statistic could not reject the hypothesis that the vegetative reproductive mode is randomly distributed throughout the group. These results show that transitions between presence and absence of the vegetative reproductive mode within Porpidia s.l. occurred several times and independently of each other. Likelihood reconstructions of ancestral character states at selected nodes suggest that - contrary to previous thought - the ancestor to Porpidia s.l. already possessed the vegetative reproductive mode. Furthermore, transition rates are reconstructed asymmetrically with the vegetative reproductive mode being gained at a much lower rate than it is lost. A cautious note has to be added, since a simulation study showed that the ancestral character state reconstructions were highly dependent on taxon sampling. However, our central conclusions, particularly the higher rate of change from vegetative reproductive mode present to absent than vice-versa within Porpidia s.l., were found to be broadly independent of taxon sampling.
S1568	A. Farwick;U. Jordan;G. Fuellen;D. Huchon;F. Catzeflis;J. Brosius;J. Schmitz	2006	Automated Scanning for Phylogenetically Informative Transposed Elements in Rodents	Systematic Biology	55	6	936-948	10.1080/10635150601064806			Transposed elements constitute an attractive, useful source of phylogenetic markers to elucidate the evolutionary history of their hosts. Frequent and successive amplifications over evolutionary time are important requirements for utilizing their presence or absence as landmarks of evolution. Although transposed elements are well distributed in rodent taxa, the generally high degree of genomic sequence divergence among species complicates our access to presence/absence data. With this in mind we developed a novel, high throughput computational strategy, called CPAL (Conserved Presence/Absence Locus finder), to identify genome-wide distributed, phylogenetically informative transposed elements flanked by highly conserved regions. From a total of 232 extracted chromosomal mouse loci we randomly selected 14 of these plus 2 others from previous test screens and attempted to amplify them via PCR in representative rodent species. All loci were amplifiable and ultimately contributed 31 phylogenetically informative markers distributed throughout the major groups of Rodentia.
S1579	K. F. Gruber;R. S. Voss;S. A. Jansa	2006	Base-Compositional Heterogeneity in the RAG1 Locus Among Didelphid Marsupials: Implications for Phylogenetic Inference and the Evolution of GC-content	Systematic Biology	55	6	936-948	10.1080/10635150601064806			Although theoretical studies have suggested that base-compositional heterogeneity can adversely affect phylogenetic reconstruction, only a few empirical examples of this phenomenon, mostly among ancient lineages (with divergence dates >100 MYA), have been reported. In the course of our phylogenetic research on the New World marsupial family Didelphidae, we sequenced 2790 bp of the RAG1 exon from exemplar species of most extant genera. Phylogenetic analysis of these sequences recovered an anomalous node consisting of two clades previously shown to be distantly related based on analyses of other molecular data. These two clades show significantly increased GC content at RAG1 third codon positions, and the resulting convergence in base composition is strong enough to overwhelm phylogenetic signal from other genes (and morphology) in most analyses of concatenated datasets. This base-compositional convergence occurred relatively recently (over tens rather than hundreds of millions of years), and the affected gene region is still in a state of evolutionary disequilibrium. Both mutation rate and substitution rate are higher in GC-rich didelphid taxa, observations consistent with RAG1 sequences having experienced a higher rate of recombination in the convergent lineages.
S1760	J. Hughes;M. Kennedy;K. P. Johnson;R. L. Palma;R. D. M. Page	2006	Multiple Cophylogenetic Analyses Reveal Frequent Cospeciation between Pelecaniform Birds and Pectinopygus Lice	Systematic Biology	56	2	232-251	10.1080/10635150701311370			Lice in the genus Pectinopygus parasitize a single order of birds (Pelecaniformes). To examine the degree of congruence between the phylogenies of 17 Pectinopygus species and their pelecaniform hosts, sequences from mitochondrial 12S rRNA, 16S rRNA, COI, and nuclear wingless and EF1-a genes (2290 nucleotides) and frommitochondrial 12S rRNA, COI, and ATPases 8 and 6 genes (1755 nucleotides) were obtained for the lice and the birds, respectively. Louse data partitions were analyzed for evidence of incongruence and evidence of long-branch attraction prior to cophylogenetic analyses. Host-parasite coevolution was studied by different methods: TreeFitter, TreeMap, ParaFit, likelihood-ratio test, data-based parsimony method, and correlation of coalescence times. All methods agree that there has been extensive cospeciation in this host-parasite system, but the results are sensitive to the selection of different phylogenetic hypotheses and analytical methods for evaluating cospeciation. Perfect congruence between phylogenies is not found in this association, probably as a result of occasional host switching by the lice. Errors due to phylogenetic reconstruction methods, incorrect or incomplete taxon sampling or to different loci undergoing different evolutionary histories cannot be rejected, thus emphasising the need for improved cophylogenetic methodologies.
S1444	S. Joly;A. Bruneau	2006	Incorporating Allelic Variation for Reconstructing the Evolutionary History of Organisms from Multiple Genes: an Example from Rosa in North America	Systematic Biology	55	4	623-636	10.1080/10635150600863109			Allelic variation within individuals holds information regarding the relationships of organisms, which is expected to be particularly important for reconstructing the evolutionary history of closely related taxa. However, little effort has been committed to incorporate such information for reconstructing the phylogeny of organisms. Haplotype trees represent a solution when one non-recombinant marker is considered, but there is no satisfying method when multiple genes are to be combined. In this paper, we propose an algorithm that converts a distance matrix of alleles to a distance matrix of organisms. This algorithm allows the incorporation of allelic variation for reconstructing the phylogeny of organisms from one or more genes. The method is applied to reconstruct the phylogeny of the seven native diploid species of Rosa sect. Cinnamomeae in North America. The glyceralgehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH), the triose phosphate isomerase (TPI) and the malate synthase (MS) genes were sequenced for 40 individuals from these species. The three genes had little genetic variation and most species showed incomplete lineage sorting, suggesting these species have a recent origin. Despite these difficulties, the networks (NeighborNet) of organisms reconstructed from the matrix obtained with the algorithm recovered groups that more closely match taxonomic boundaries than did the haplotype trees. The combined network of individuals shows that species west of the Rocky Mountains, Rosa gymnocarpa and R. pisocarpa, form exclusive groups and that together they are distinct from eastern species. In the east, three groups were found to be exclusive: R. nitida ˆ R. palustris, R. foliolosa, and R. blanda ˆ R. woodsii. These groups are congruent with the morphology and the ecology of species. The method is also useful for representing hybrid individuals when the relationships are reconstructed using a phylogenetic network.
S1677	P. S. Manos;P. S. Soltis;D. E. Soltis;S. R. Manchester;S. H. Oh;C. D. Bell;D. L. Dilcher;D. E. Stone	2006	Phylogeny of Extant and Fossil Juglandaceae Inferred from the Integration of Molecular and Morphological Data Sets	Systematic Biology	56	3	412-430	10.1080/10635150701408523			It is widely acknowledged that integrating fossils into data sets of extant taxa is imperative for proper placement of fossils, resolution of relationships, and a better understanding of character evolution. The importance of this process has been further magnified because of the crucial role of fossils in dating divergence times. Outstanding issues remain, including appropriate methods to place fossils in phylogenetic trees, the importance of molecules vs. morphology in these analyses, as well as the impact of potentially large amounts of missing data for fossil taxa. In this study we used the angiosperm clade Juglandaceae as a model for investigating methods of integrating fossils into a phylogenetic framework of extant taxa. The clade has a rich fossil record relative to low extant diversity, as well as a robust molecular phylogeny and morphological database for extant taxa. After combining fossil organ genera into composite, terminal taxa our objectives were to: 1) compare multiple methods for the integration of the fossils and extant taxa (including total evidence, molecular scaffolds, and molecular matrix representation with parsimony: MRP); 2) explore the impact of missing data (incomplete taxa and characters) and the weight of evidence for placing fossils on the topology; 3) simulate the phylogenetic effect of missing data using our molecular data sets; and 4) place fossils and compare the impact of single and multiple fossil constraints in estimating the age of clades. Despite large and variable amounts of missing data, each of the methods provided reasonable placement of both fossils and simulated „artificial fossils‰ in the phylogeny previously inferred only from extant taxa. Three fossil taxa (Cruciptera simsonii, Paleoplatycarya wingii, and Platycarya americana) were placed in crown clades containing living taxa for which morphological affinities had previously been suggested based on descriptive morphology, whereas Polyptera manningii was placed as sister to two well established subclades. The position of Paleooreomunnea stoneana was ambiguous with total evidence, but conclusive with DNA scaffolds and MRP. There was less disturbance of relationships among extant taxa using a total evidence approach, and the DNA scaffold approach did not provide improved resolution or internal support for clades compared to total evidence, whereas weighted MRP retained comparable levels of support, but lost crown clade resolution. Multiple calibration points generally provided reasonable age estimates, but the use of single constraints provided by extinct genera tended to underestimate clade ages.
S1678	P. S. Manos;P. S. Soltis;D. E. Soltis;S. R. Manchester;S. H. Oh;C. D. Bell;D. L. Dilcher;D. E. Stone	2006	Phylogeny of Extant and Fossil Juglandaceae Inferred from the Integration of Molecular and Morphological Data Sets	Systematic Biology	56	3	412-430	10.1080/10635150701408523			It is widely acknowledged that integrating fossils into data sets of extant taxa is imperative for proper placement of fossils, resolution of relationships, and a better understanding of character evolution. The importance of this process has been further magnified because of the crucial role of fossils in dating divergence times. Outstanding issues remain, including appropriate methods to place fossils in phylogenetic trees, the importance of molecules vs. morphology in these analyses, as well as the impact of potentially large amounts of missing data for fossil taxa. In this study we used the angiosperm clade Juglandaceae as a model for investigating methods of integrating fossils into a phylogenetic framework of extant taxa. The clade has a rich fossil record relative to low extant diversity, as well as a robust molecular phylogeny and morphological database for extant taxa. After combining fossil organ genera into composite, terminal taxa our objectives were to: 1) compare multiple methods for the integration of the fossils and extant taxa (including total evidence, molecular scaffolds, and molecular matrix representation with parsimony: MRP); 2) explore the impact of missing data (incomplete taxa and characters) and the weight of evidence for placing fossils on the topology; 3) simulate the phylogenetic effect of missing data using our molecular data sets; and 4) place fossils and compare the impact of single and multiple fossil constraints in estimating the age of clades. Despite large and variable amounts of missing data, each of the methods provided reasonable placement of both fossils and simulated „artificial fossils‰ in the phylogeny previously inferred only from extant taxa. Three fossil taxa (Cruciptera simsonii, Paleoplatycarya wingii, and Platycarya americana) were placed in crown clades containing living taxa for which morphological affinities had previously been suggested based on descriptive morphology, whereas Polyptera manningii was placed as sister to two well established subclades. The position of Paleooreomunnea stoneana was ambiguous with total evidence, but conclusive with DNA scaffolds and MRP. There was less disturbance of relationships among extant taxa using a total evidence approach, and the DNA scaffold approach did not provide improved resolution or internal support for clades compared to total evidence, whereas weighted MRP retained comparable levels of support, but lost crown clade resolution. Multiple calibration points generally provided reasonable age estimates, but the use of single constraints provided by extinct genera tended to underestimate clade ages.
S1641	D. C. Marshall;C. Simon;T. R. Buckley	2006	Accurate Branch Length Estimation in Partitioned Bayesian Analyses Requires Accommodation of Among-Partition Rate Variation and Attention to Branch Length Priors	Systematic Biology	55	6	993-1003	10.1080/10635150601087641			Molecular phylogenetic studies are making increasing use of partitioned Bayesian analyses via software tools like MrBayes version 3. Data partitioning is important because, as long as the same topology/history underlies all of the partitions, it addresses some of the problems associated with the combination of data sets with heterogeneous rates and eliminates the need to argue the validity of tests that have been used to judge data combinability. In addition, new studies indicate that data partitioning and the use of mixed models often dramatically improve the fit of model to data without the cost of overparameterization. While applying partitioned models to studies of protein-coding mitochondrial data, we have found that analyses using MrBayes may infer overly „long‰ trees if among-partition rate variation (APRV) is not explicitly accommodated and if data from different partitions evolve at different average rates.
S1462	J. Mueller;R. R. Reisz	2006	The phylogeny of early eureptiles: comparing parsimony and Bayesian approaches in the investigation of a basal fossil clade	Systematic Biology	55	3	503-511	10.1080/10635150600755396			For the first time the phylogenetic relationships of early eureptiles, consisting of captorhinids, diapsids, and protorothyridids, are investigated in a modern phylogenetic context using both parsimony and Bayesian analysis. 90 parsimony-informative characters and 25 taxa were included in the analyses. The Bayesian analysis was run with and without a gamma shape parameter allowing for variable rates across characters. In addition, we ran two more Bayesian analyses that included 42 autapomorphies and thus parsimony-uninformative characters in order to test the effect of variable branch lengths. The different analyses largely converged to the same topology suggesting that the „protorothyridid‰ Coelostegus is the sister taxon of all other eureptiles and that the remaining „protorothyridids‰ are paraphyletic. Also, there is a close relationship between diapsids and Anthracodromeus, Cephalerpeton, and Protorothyris, a grouping of Thuringothyris with captorhinids, and a variable position of the „protorothyridids‰ Brouffia, Hylonomus, and Paleothyris. The lack of resolution in some parts of the tree might be due to „hard polytomies‰ and short divergence times between the respective taxa. The tree topology is consistent with the hypothesis that the temporal fenestrations of diapsid reptiles appear to be the consequence of a more lightly-built skeleton, indicating a significant ecological shift in the early stages of diapsid evolution. Bayesian analysis is a very useful additional approach in studies of fossil taxa in which more traditional statistical support like the bootstrap is often weak. However, the exclusive use of the Mk model appears suitable only if autapomorphic characters are included, while the Mk+gamma model performed well with or without autapomorphies. [Bayesian analysis; Captorhinidae; Diapsida; Eureptilia; fossil taxa; morphological characters; parsimony; Protorothyrididae.]
S1558	T. Sasaki;Y. Yasukawa;K. Takahashi;S. Miura;N. Okada	2006	Extensive Morphological Convergence and Rapid Radiation in the Evolutionary History of the family Geoemydidae (Old World Pond Turtles) Revealed by SINE Insertion Analysis	Systematic Biology	55	6	912-927	10.1080/10635150601058014			The family Geoemydidae is one of three in the superfamily Testudinoidea and is the most diversified family of extant turtle species. The phylogenetic relationships in this family and among related families have been vigorously investigated from both morphological and molecular viewpoints. The evolutionary history of Geoemydidae, however, remains controversial. Therefore, to elucidate the phylogenetic relationships of Geoemydidae and related species, we applied the SINE insertion method to investigate 49 informative SINE loci in 28 species. We detected four major evolutionary lineages (Testudinidae, Batagur group, Siebenrockiella group and Geoemyda group) in the clade Testuguria (a clade of Geoemydidae + Testudinidae). All five specimens of Testudinidae form a monophyletic clade. The Batagur group comprises five batagurines. The Siebenrockiella group has one species, Siebenrockiella crassicollis. The Geoemyda group comprises 15 geoemydines (including three former batagurines, Mauremys reevesii, Mauremys sinensis and Heosemys annandalii). Among these four groups, the SINE insertion patterns were inconsistent at four loci, suggesting that an ancestral species of Testuguria radiated and rapidly diverged into the four lineages during the initial stage of its evolution. Furthermore, within the Geoemyda group we identified three evolutionary lineages, namely Mauremys, Cuora and Heosemys. The Heosemys lineage comprises Heosemys, Sacalia, Notochelys and Melanochelys species, and its monophyly is a novel assemblage in Geoemydidae. Our SINE phylogenetic tree demonstrates extensive convergent morphological evolution between the Batagur group and the three species of the Geoemyda group, M. reevesii, M. sinensis and H. annandalii.
S1449	E. Schuettpelz;K. M. Pryer	2006	Reconciling extreme branch length differences: decoupling time and rate through the evolutionary history of filmy ferns	Systematic Biology	55	3	485-502	10.1080/10635150600755438			The rate of molecular evolution is not constant across the Tree of Life. Characterizing rate discrepancies and evaluating the relative roles of time and rate along branches through the past are both critical to a full understanding of evolutionary history. In this study, we explore the interactions of time and rate in filmy ferns (Hymenophyllaceae), a lineage with extreme branch length differences between the two major clades. We test for the presence of significant rate discrepancies within and between these clades, and we separate time and rate across the filmy fern phylogeny to simultaneously yield an evolutionary time scale of filmy fern diversification and reconstructions of ancestral rates of molecular evolution. Our results indicate that the branch length disparity observed between the major lineages of filmy ferns is indeed due to a significant difference in molecular evolutionary rate. The estimation of divergence times reveals that the timing of crown group diversification was not concurrent for the two lineages, and the reconstruction of ancestral rates of molecular evolution points to a substantial rate deceleration in one of the clades. Further analysis suggests that this may be due to a genome-wide deceleration in the rate of nucleotide substitution.
S1538	J. Syring;K. Farrell;R. Businsky;R. Cronn;A. Liston	2007	Widespread Genealogical Nonmonophyly in Species of Pinus Subgenus Strobus	Systematic Biology	56	2	163-181	10.1080/10635150701258787			Phylogenetic relationships among Pinus species from subgenus Strobus remain unresolved despite combined efforts based on nrITS and cpDNA. To provide greater resolution among these taxa, a 900-bp intron from a Late Embryogenesis Abundant (LEA)-like gene (IFG8612) was sequenced from 39 pine species, with two or more alleles representing 33 species. Nineteen of 33 species exhibited allelic nonmonphyly in the strict consensus tree, and 10 deviated significantly from allelic monophyly based on topology incongruence tests. Intraspecific nucleotide diversity ranged from 0.0 ˆ 0.0211, and analysis of variance shows that nucleotide diversity was strongly associated (P<0.0001) with the degree of species monophyly. While species nonmonophyly complicates phylogenetic interpretations, this nuclear locus offers greater topological support than previously observed for cpDNA or nrITS. Lacking evidence for hybridization, recombination, or imperfect taxonomy, we feel that incomplete lineage sorting remains the best explanation for the polymorphisms shared among species. Depending on the species, coalescent expectations indicate that reciprocal monophyly will be more likely than paraphyly in 1.71 to 24.0 ◊ 106 years, and that complete genome wide coalescence in these species may require up to 76.3 ◊ 106 years. The absence of allelic coalescence is a severe constraint in the application of phylogenetic methods in Pinus, and taxa sharing similar life history traits with Pinus are likely to show species nonmonophyly using nuclear markers.
S1522	E. S. Tavares;A. J. Baker;S. L. Pereira;C. Y. Miyaki	2006	Phylogenetic Relationships and Historical Biogeography of Neotropical Parrots (Psittaciformes: Psittacidae: Arini) Inferred from Mitochondrial and Nuclear DNA Sequences	Systematic Biology	55	3	454-470	10.1080/10635150600697390			Previous hypotheses of phylogenetic relationships among Neotropical parrots were based on limited taxon sampling and lacked support for most internal nodes. In this study we increased the number of taxa (29 species belonging to 25 of the 30 genera) and gene sequences (6,388 base pairs of RAG-1, cyt b, NADH2, ATPase 6, ATPase 8, COIII, 12S rDNA, and 16S rDNA) to obtain a stronger molecular phylogenetic hypothesis for this group of birds. Analyses of the combined gene sequences using maximum likelihood and Bayesian methods resulted in a well-supported phylogeny, and indicated that amazons and allies are a sister clade to macaws, conures, and relatives, and these two clades are in turn a sister group to parrotlets. Key morphological and behavioral characters used in previous classifications were mapped on the molecular tree and were phylogenetically uninformative. We estimated divergence times of taxa using the molecular tree and Bayesian and penalized likelihood methods that allow for rate variation in DNA substitutions among sites and taxa. Our estimates suggest that the Neotropical parrots shared a common ancestor with Australian parrots 59 Mya (Million of years ago; 95% Credibility Interval (CrI) 66, 51 Mya), well before Australia separated from Antarctica and South America, implying that ancestral parrots were widespread in Gondwanaland. Thus, the divergence of Australian and Neotropical parrots could be attributed to vicariance. The three major clades of Neotropical parrots originated about 50 Mya (95% CrI 57, 41 Mya), coinciding with periods of higher sea level when both Antarctica and South America were fragmented with transcontinental seaways, and likely isolated the ancestors of modern Neotropical parrots in different regions in these continents. The correspondence between major paleoenvironmental changes in South America and the diversification of genera in the clade of amazons and allies between 46 and 16 Mya suggests they diversified exclusively in South America. Conversely, ancestors of parrotlets and of macaws, conures, and allies may have been isolated in Antarctica and/or the southern cone of South America, and only dispersed out of these southern regions when climate cooled and Antarctica became ice-encrusted about 35 Mya. The subsequent radiation of macaws and their allies in South America beginning about 28 Mya (95% CrI 22, 35Mya) coincides with the uplift of the Andes and the subsequent formation of dry, open grassland habitats that would have facilitated ecological speciation via niche expansion from forested habitats.
S1653	A. Vanderpoorten;B. Goffinet	2006	Mapping uncertainty and phylogenetic uncertainty in ancestral character state reconstruction: an example in the moss genus Brachytheciastrum	Systematic Biology	55	6	957-971	10.1080/10635150601088995			The evolution of species traits along a phylogeny can be examined through an increasing number of possible, but not necessarily complementary approaches. In this paper, we assess whether deriving ancestral states of discrete morphological characters from a model whose parameters are (i) optimized by ML on a most likely tree; (ii) optimized by ML onto each of a Bayesian sample of trees; and (iii) sampled by a MCMC visiting the space of a Bayesian sample of trees, affects the reconstruction of ancestral states in the moss genus Brachytheciastrum. In the first two methods, the choice of a single- or two-rate model and of a genetic distance (wherein branch lengths are used to determine the probabilities of change) or speciational (wherein changes are only driven by speciation events) model based upon a likelihood ratio test, strongly depended on the sampled trees. Despite these differences in model selection, reconstructions of ancestral character states were strongly correlated to each others across nodes, often at r>0.9, for all the characters. The Bayesian approach of ancestral character state reconstruction offers, however, a series of advantages over the single tree approach or the ML model optimization on a Bayesian sample of trees because it does not involve restricting model parameters prior to reconstructing ancestral states but rather allows a range of model parameters and ancestral character states to be sampled according to their posterior probabilities. From the distribution of the latter, conclusions on trait evolution can be made in a more satisfactorily way than when a substantial part of the uncertainty of the results is obscured by the focus on a single set of model parameters and associated ancestral states. The reconstructions of ancestral character states in Brachytheciastrum reveal rampant parallel morphological evolution. Most species previously described based on phenetic grounds are thus resolved of polyphyletic origin. Species polyphylly has been increasingly reported among mosses, raising severe reservations regarding current species definition.
S1517	N. Wahlberg	2006	That Awkward Age for Butterflies: Insights from the Age of the Butterfly Subfamily Nymphalinae (Lepidoptera: Nymphalidae)	Systematic Biology	55	5	703-714	10.1080/10635150600913235			The study of the historical biogeography of butterflies has been hampered by a lack of well-resolved phylogenies and a good estimate of the temporal span over which butterflies have evolved. Recently there has been surge of phylogenetic hypotheses for various butterfly groups, but estimating ages of divergence is still in its infancy for this group of insects. The main problem has been the sparse fossil record for butterflies. In this study I have used a surprisingly good fossil record for the subfamily Nymphalinae (Lepidoptera: Nymphalidae) to estimate the ages of diversification of major lineages using Bayesian relaxed clock methods. I have investigated the effects of varying priors on posterior estimates in the analyses. For this dataset, it is clear that the prior of the rate of molecular evolution at the ingroup node had the largest effect on the results. Taking this into account, I have been able to arrive at a plausible history of lineage splits, which appears to be correlated with known paleogeological events. The subfamily appears to have diversified soon after the K/T event about 65 million years ago. Several splits are coincident with major paleogeological events, such as the connection of the African and Asian continents about 21 million years ago and the presence of a peninsula of land connecting the current Greater Antilles to the South American continent 35-33 million years ago. My results suggest that the age of Nymphalidae is older than the 70 million years speculated to be the age of butterflies as a whole.
S1493	H. Won;S. S. Renner	2006	Dating Dispersal and Radiation in the Gymnosperm Gnetum (Gnetales) ÀÜ clock calibration when outgroup relationships are uncertain	Systematic Biology	55	4	610-622	10.1080/10635150600812619			Most implementations of molecular clocks require resolved topologies. However, one of the Bayesian relaxed clock approaches accepts input topologies that include polytomies. We explored the effects of resolved and unresolved input topologies in a rate-heterogeneous sequence data set for Gnetum, a member of the seed plant lineage Gnetales. Gnetum, which has no fossil record, has ten species in South America, one in tropical West Africa, and 20-25 in tropical Asia, and explanations for the ages of these disjunctions involve long distance dispersal and/or the breakup of Gondwana. The other two genera of Gnetales, as well as conifers, Ginkgo, cycads, and angiosperms, have fossil records that can serve to constrain divergence events in Gnetum and thus obtain absolute time estimates for the geographic disjunctions. To resolve relationships within Gnetum, we sequenced most of its species for six loci from the chloroplast (rbcL, matK, and the trnT-trnF region), the nucleus (rITS/5.8S and the LEAFY gene second intron), and the mitochondrion (nad1 gene second intron). We then applied different clock approaches and outgroup topologies because relationships among the major seed plant lineages are currently unresolved. For a small set of Gnetales exemplars (n =13) in which rbcL and matK satisfied the clock assumption, we obtained time estimates from a strict clock, calibrated with one outgroup fossil. We then re-estimated divergence times based on a larger sample of seed plants (n = 38), using a relaxed Bayesian clock, multiple fossil constraints, and differently resolved topologies, including one that contained a basal polytomy among gymnosperms. The changing hierarchical relationships among seed plants (and accordingly changing placements of distant calibration fossils) resulted in small changes of within-Gnetum estimates because topologically close constraints overrode more distant constraints. Regardless of the seed plant topology assumed, relaxed clock estimates suggest that the extant species groups of Gnetum began diverging from each other during the Upper Oligocene. Strict clock estimates imply a mid-Miocene divergence. These estimates, together with the phylogeny for Gnetum from the six combined data sets, imply that the extant African species of Gnetum is not a remnant of a once Gondwanan distribution. Miocene and Pliocene range expansions are inferred for the Asian subclades of Gnetum, which stem from an ancestor that arrived from Africa. These findings fit with fruit dispersal by water in several species of Gnetum, morphological similarities among apparently young species, and incomplete concerted evolution in the nuclear ITS region.
S1562	C. Yesson;A. Culham	2006	Phyloclimatic Modeling: Combining Phylogenetics and Bioclimatic Modeling	Systematic Biology	55	5	785-802	10.1080/1063515060081570			We investigate the impact of past climates on plant diversification by tracking the "footprint" of climate change on a phylogenetic tree. Diversity within the cosmopolitan carnivorous plant genus Drosera (Droseraceae) is focused within Mediterranean climate regions. We explore whether this diversity is temporally linked to Mediterranean-type climatic shifts of the mid-Miocene and whether climate preferences are conservative over phylogenetic timescales. Phyloclimatic modelling combines environmental niche (bioclimatic) modelling with phylogenetics in order to study evolutionary patterns in relation to climate change. We present the largest and most complete such example to date using Drosera. The bioclimatic models of extant species demonstrate clear phylogenetic patterns; this is particularly evident for the tuberous sundews from South-Western Australia (subgenus Ergaleium). We employ a method for establishing confidence intervals of node ages on a phylogeny using replicates from a Bayesian phylogenetic analysis. This chronogram shows that many clades, including subgenus Ergaleium and section Bryastrum, diversified during the establishment of the Mediterranean-type climate. Ancestral reconstructions of bioclimatic models demonstrate a pattern of preference for this climate type within these groups. Ancestral bioclimatic models are projected into palaeo-climate reconstructions for the time periods indicated by the chronogram. We present two such examples which each generate plausible estimates of ancestral lineage distribution, which are similar to their current distributions. This is the first study to attempt bioclimatic projections on evolutionary timescales. The sundews appear to have diversified in response to local climate development. Some groups are specialised for Mediterranean climates, others show wide-ranging generalism. This demonstrates that Phyloclimatic modelling could be repeated for other plant groups and is fundamental to the understanding of evolutionary responses to climate change.
S1727	A. K. Brysting;B. Oxelman;K. T. Huber;V. Moulton;C. Brochmann	2007	Untangling Complex Histories of Genome Mergings in High Polyploids	Systematic Biology	56	3	467-476	10.1080/10635150701424553			Polyploidy, the duplication of entire genomes, plays a major role in plant evolution. In allopolyploids, genome duplication is associated with hybridization between two or more divergent genomes. Successive hybridization and polyploidzation events can build up species complexes of allopolyploids with complicated network-like histories, and the evolutionary history of many plant groups cannot be adequately represented by phylogenetic trees because of such reticulate events. The history of complex genome mergings within a high-polyploid species complex in the genus Cerastium (Caryophyllaceae) is here untangled by the use of a network algorithm and non-coding sequences of a low-copy number gene. The resulting network illustrates how hybridization and polyploidization have acted as key evolutionary processes in creating a plant group where high-level allopolyploids clearly outnumber extant parental genomes.
S1785	K. Geuten;T. Massingham;P. Darius;E. Smets;N. Goldman	2007	Experimental Design Criteria in Phylogenetics: Where to add Taxa	Systematic Biology	56	4	609-622	10.1080/10635150701499563			Accurate phylogenetic inference is a topic of intensive research and debate, and has been studied in response to many different factors: for example, differences in the method of reconstruction, the shape of the underlying tree, the substitution model and varying quantities and types of data. Investigating whether the conditions used might lead to inaccurate inference has been attempted through elaborate data exploration but less attention has been given to creating a unified methodology to enable experimental designs in phylogenetic analysis to be improved and so avoid suboptimal conditions. Experimental design has been part of the field of statistics since the seminal work of Fisher in the early twentieth century and a large body of literature exists on how to design optimum experiments. Here we investigate the use of the Fisher information matrix to decide between candidate positions for adding a taxon to a fixed topology, and introduce a parameter transformation that permits comparison of these different designs. This extension to Goldman (1998) thus allows investigation of `where to add taxa' in a phylogeny. We compare three different measures of the total information for selecting the position to add a taxon to a tree. Our methods are illustrated by investigating the behaviour of the three criteria when adding a branch to model trees, and by applying the different criteria to two biological examples: a simplified taxon-sampling problem in the balsaminoid Ericales and the phylogeny of seed plants.
S1781	A. F. Hugall;R. Foster;M. S. Y. Lee	2007	Calibration Choice, Rate Smoothing, and the Pattern of Tetrapod Diversification According to the Long Nuclear Gene RAG-1	Systematic Biology	56	4	543-563	10.1080/10635150701477825			A phylogeny of tetrapods is inferred from nearly complete sequences of the nuclear RAG-1 gene sampled across 88 taxa encompassing all major clades, analysed via parsimony and Bayesian methods. The phylogeny provides support for Lissamphibia, Theria, Lepidosauria, a turtle-archosaur clade, as well as most traditionally-accepted groupings. This tree allows simultaneous molecular clock dating for all tetrapod groups using a set of well-corroborated calibrations. Relaxed clock (PLRS) methods, using the amniote=315 mya calibration or a set of consistent calibrations, recovers reasonable divergence dates for most groups. However, the analysis systematically underestimates divergence dates within archosaurs. The bird-crocodile split, robustly documented in the fossil record as being around ~245 mya, is estimated at only ~190 mya, and dates for other divergences within archosaurs are similarly underestimated. Archosaurs and particulary turtles, have slow apparent rates possibly confounding rate modelling, and inclusion of calibrations within archosaurs (despite their high deviances) not only improves divergence estimates within archosaurs, but also across other groups. Notably, the monotreme-therian split (~210 mya) matches the fossil record; the squamate radiation (~190 mya) is younger than suggested by some recent molecular studies, and inconsistent with identification of ~220 and ~165 myo fossils as acrodont iguanians, and ~95 myo fossils colubroid snakes; the bird-lizard (reptile) split is considerably older than fossil record estimates (¡Ü275 mya); and Sphenodon is a remarkable phylogenetic relic, being the sole survivor of a lineage more than a quarter of a billion years old. Comparison with other molecular clock studies of tetrapod divergences suggests that the common practice of enforcing most calibrations as minima, with a single liberal maximal constraint, will systematically overestimate divergence dates. Similarly, saturation of mitochondrial DNA sequences, and the resultant greater compression of basal branches means that using only external deep calibrations will also lead to inflated age estimates within the focal ingroup.
S1902	S. Jian;P. S. Soltis;M. A. Gitzendanner;M. J. Moore;R. Li;T. A. Hendry;Y. L. Qiu;A. Dhingra;C. D. Bell;D. E. Soltis	2008	Resolving an ancient, rapid radiation in Saxifragales	Systematic Biology	57	1	38-57	10.1080/10635150801888871			Despite the prior use of ~ 9,000 bp, deep-level relationships within the angiosperm clade Saxifragales remain enigmatic, due to an ancient, rapid radiation (89.5 -110 Myr based on the fossil record). To resolve these deep relationships, we constructed several new data sets: 1) 16 genes representing the three genomic compartments within plant cells (two nuclear, ten plastid, four mitochondrial; aligned, analyzed length = 21,460 bp) for 28 taxa; 2) the entire plastid inverted repeat (IR; 26,625 bp) for 17 taxa; 3) „total evidence‰ (50,845 bp) for both 17 and 28 taxa (the latter missing the IR). Bayesian and ML methods yielded identical topologies across partitions with most clades receiving high posterior probability (pp = 1.0) and bootstrap (95-100%) values, suggesting that with sufficient data, rapid radiations can be resolved. In contrast, parsimony analyses of different partitions yielded conflicting topologies, particularly with respect to the placement of Paeoniaceae, a clade characterized by a long branch. In agreement with published simulations, the addition of characters increased bootstrap support for the putatively erroneous placement of Paeoniaceae. Although having far fewer parsimony-informative sites, slowly-evolving plastid genes provided higher resolution and support for deep-level relationships than rapidly evolving plastid genes, yielding a topology close to the Bayesian and ML total evidence tree. The plastid IR region may be an ideal source of slowly evolving genes for resolution of deep-level angiosperm divergences that date to 90 my or more. Rapidly evolving genes provided support for tip relationships not recovered with slowly evolving genes, indicating some complementarity. Age estimates using penalized likelihood with and without age constraints for the 28-taxon, total evidence data set are comparable to fossil dates, whereas estimates based on the 17-taxon data are much older than implied by the fossil record. Hence, sufficient taxon density, and not simply numerous base pairs, is important in reliably estimating ages. Age estimates indicate that the early diversification of Saxifragales occurred rapidly, over a timespan as short as 6 million years. Between 25,000 ˆ 50,000 bp were needed to resolve this radiation with high support values. Extrapolating from Saxifragales, a similar number of base pairs may be needed to resolve the many other deep-level radiations of comparable age in angiosperms.
S1844	M. Knapp;R. Mudaliar;D. Havell;S. J. Wagstaff;P. J. Lockhart	2007	The Drowning of New Zealand and the Problem of Agathis	Systematic Biology	56	5	862-870	10.1080/10635150701636412			80 million years ago (mya) the landmass that was to become New Zealand broke away from the Gondwanan super continent. During the Oligocene period (26 - 38 mya) there was a significant reduction in the landmass of New Zealand However, whether or not New Zealand was completely submerged is a matter of controversy and recent debate. If it was completely submerged during the Oligocene, then all extant biota must have arrived by transoceanic distance dispersal since that time. This study reports molecular systematic and molecular clock analyses based on 3011 base pairs of sequence data (matK and rbcL coding regions, trnD-trnT intergenic region) from the chloroplast genome of nine different species from the Araucariaceae family. Analyses of these data suggest that Australian and New Zealand Agathis lineages diverged in the late Cretaceous/early Tertiary period. These estimates are consistent with in situ survival of the Agathis australis lineage in New Zealand following the breakup of Gondwana. They imply the continuous existence of land in the New Zealand area throughout the Tertiary.
S1892	C. Lakner;P. v d Mark;J. P. Huelsenbeck;B. Larget;F. Ronquist	2008	Efficiency of Markov Chain Monte Carlo Tree Proposals in Bayesian Phylogenetics	Systematic Biology	57	1	86-103	10.1080/10635150801886156			The main limiting factor in Bayesian MCMC analysis of phylogeny is typically the efficiency with which topology proposals sample tree space. Here we evaluate the performance of seven different proposal mechanisms, including most of those used in current Bayesian phylogenetics software. We sampled 12 empirical DNA data sets - ranging in size from 27 to 71 taxa and from 378 to 2,520 sites - under difficult conditions: short runs, no Metropolis-coupling, and an over-simplified substitution model producing difficult tree spaces (Jukes Cantor with equal site rates). Convergence was assessed by comparison to reference samples obtained from multiple Metropolis-coupled runs. We find that proposals producing topology changes as a side effect of branch length changes (LOCAL and Continuous Change) consistently perform worse than those involving stochastic branch-rearrangements (nearest neighbor interchange, subtree pruning and regrafting, tree bisection and reconnection, or subtree swapping). Among the latter, moves that use an extension mechanism to mix local with more distant rearrangements show better overall performance than those involving only local or only random rearrangements. Moves with only local rearrangements tend to mix well but have long burn-in periods, while moves with random rearrangements often show the reverse pattern. Combinations of moves tend to perform better than single moves. The time to convergence can be shortened considerably by starting with a good tree but this comes at the cost of compromising convergence diagnostics based on over-dispersed starting points. Our results have important implications for developers of Bayesian MCMC implementations and for the large group of users of Bayesian phylogenetics software.
S1856	J. W. Leigh;E. Susko;M. Baumgartner;A. J. Roger	2007	Testing Phylogenetic Congruence in Phylogenomic Analysis	Systematic Biology	57	1	104-115	10.1080/10635150801910436			Phylogenomic analyses of large sets of genes or proteins have the potential to revolutionize our understanding of the tree of life. However, problems arise because estimated phylogenies from individual loci often differ because of different histories, systematic bias, or stochastic error. We have developed CONCATERPILLAR, a hierarchical clustering method based on likelihood-ratio testing that identifies congruent loci for phylogenomic analysis. CONCATERPILLAR also includes a test for shared relative evolutionary rates between genes indicating whether they should be analyzed separately or by concatenation. In simulation studies, the performance of this method is excellent when a multiple comparison correction is applied. We analyzed a phylogenomic data set of 60 translational protein sequences from the major supergroups of eukaryotes and identified three congruent subsets of proteins. Analysis of the largest set indicates improved congruence relative to the full data set, and produced a phylogeny with stronger support for five eukaryote supergroups including the Opisthokonts, the Plantae, the stramenopiles + alveolates (Chromalveolates), the Amoebozoa, and the Excavata. In contrast, the phylogeny of the second largest set indicates a close relationship between stramenopiles and red algae, to the exclusion of alveolates, suggesting gene transfer from the red algal secondary symbiont to the ancestral stramenopile host nucleus during the origin of their chloroplasts. Investigating phylogenomic data sets for conflicting signals has the potential to both improve phylogenetic accuracy and inform our understanding of genome evolution.
S1917	I. J. Maureira Butler;B. E. Pfeil;A. Muangprom;T. C. Osborn;J. J. Doyle	2008	The reticulate history of Medicago (Fabaceae)	Systematic Biology	57	3	466-482	10.1080/10635150802172168			The phylogenetic history of Medicago was examined for 60 accessions from 56 species using two nuclear genes (CNGC5 and &#946;-cop) and one mitochondrial region (rpS14-cob). The results of several analyses revealed that extensive robustly supported incongruence exists among the nuclear genes, the cause of which we seek to explain. After rejecting several processes, hybridization and lineage sorting of ancestral polymorphisms remained as the most likely factors promoting incongruence. Using coalescence simulations, we rejected lineage sorting alone as an explanation of the differences among gene trees. The results indicate that hybridization has been common and ongoing among lineages since the origin of Medicago. Coalescence provides a good framework to test the causes of incongruence commonly seen among gene trees but requires knowledge of effective population sizes and generation times. We estimated the effective population size at 240,000 individuals and assumed a generation time of 1 year in Medicago (many are annual plants). A sesitivity analysis showed that our conclusions remain unchanged using a larger effective population size and/or longer generation time.
S1825	J. A. McGuire;C. C. Witt;D. L. Altshuler;J. V. Remsen	2007	Phylogenetic Systematics and Biogeography of Hummingbirds: Bayesian and Maximum Likelihood Analyses of Partitioned Data and Selection of an Appropriate Partitioning Strategy	Systematic Biology	56	5	837-856	10.1080/10635150701656360			Hummingbirds are an important model system in avian biology, but to date the group has been the subject of remarkably few phylogenetic investigations. Here we present partitioned Bayesian and maximum likelihood phylogenetic analyses for 151 of approximately 330 species of hummingbirds and 12 outgroup taxa based on two protein-coding mitochondrial genes (ND2 and ND4), flanking tRNAs, and two nuclear introns (AK1 and BFib). We analyzed these data under several partitioning strategies ranging between unpartitioned and a maximum of nine partitions. In order to select a statistically justified partitioning strategy following partitioned Bayesian analysis, we considered four alternative criteria including Bayes factors, and modified versions of the Akaike Information Criterion for small sample sizes (AICc), Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC), and a Decision Theoretic methodology (DT). Following partitioned maximum-likelihood analyses, we selected a best fitting strategy using hierarchical likelihood ratio tests (hLRTS), the conventional AICc, BIC, and DT, concluding that the most stringent criterion, the performance-based DT, was the most appropriate methodology for selecting amongst partitioning strategies. In the context of our well-resolved and well-supported phylogenetic estimate, we consider the historical biogeography of hummingbirds using ancestral state reconstructions of (1) primary geographic region of occurrence (i.e., South America, Central America, North America, Greater Antilles, Lesser Antilles), (2) Andean or non-Andean geographic distribution, and (3) minimum elevational occurrence. These analyses indicate that the basal hummingbird assemblages originated in the lowlands of South America, that most of the principle clades of hummingbirds (all but Mountain Gems and possibly Bees) originated on this continent, and that there have been many (at least 30) independent invasions of other primary landmasses, especially Central America.
S1808	S. L. Pereira;K. P. Johnson;D. H. Clayton;A. J. Baker	2007	Mitochondrial and nuclear DNA sequences support a Cretaceous origin of Columbiformes and a dispersal-driven radiation in the Paleogene	Systematic Biology	56	4	656-672	10.1080/10635150701549672			Phylogenetic relationships among genera of pigeons and doves (Aves, Columbiformes) have not been fully resolved because of limited sampling of taxa and characters in previous studies. We therefore sequenced multiple nuclear and mitochondrial DNA genes totaling over 9,000 bp from 33 of 41 genera plus 8 outgroup taxa, and, together with sequences from five other pigeon genera retrieved from GenBank, recovered a strong phylogenetic hypothesis for the Columbiformes. Three major clades were recovered with the combined data set, comprising the basally branching New World pigeons and allies (clade A) that are sister to Neotropical ground doves (clade B), and the Afro-Eurasian and Australasian taxa (clade C). None of these clades supports the monophyly of current families and subfamilies. The extinct, flightless dodo and solitaires (Raphidae) were embedded within pigeons and doves (Columbidae) in clade C, and monophyly of the subfamily Columbinae was refuted because the remaining subfamilies were nested within it. Divergence times estimated using a Bayesian framework suggest that Columbiformes diverged from outgroups such as Apodiformes and Caprimulgiformes in the Cretaceous before the mass extinction that marks the end of this period. Bayesian and maximum likelihood inferences of ancestral areas, accounting for phylogenetic uncertainty and divergence times, respectively, favor an ancient origin of Columbiformes in the Neotropical portion of what was then Gondwana. The radiation of modern genera of Columbiformes started in the Early Eocene to the Middle Miocene, as previously estimated for other avian groups such as ratites, tinamous, galliform birds, penguins, shorebirds, parrots, passerine birds, and toucans. Multiple dispersals of more derived Columbiformes between Australasian and Afro-Eurasian regions are required to explain current distributions.
S1879	V. Ranwez;V. Berry;A. Criscuolo;P. H. Fabre;S. Guillemot;C. Scornavacca;E. J. P. Douzery	2007	PhySIC: a veto supertree method with desirable properties	Systematic Biology	56	5	798-817	10.1080/10635150701639754			This paper focuses on veto supertree methods, i.e., methods that aim at producing a conservative synthesis of the relationships agreed upon by all source trees. We propose desirable properties that a supertree should satisfy in this framework, namely the non-contradiction property (PC) and the induction property (PI). The former requires that the supertree does not contain relationships that contradict one or a combination of the source topologies, whereas the latter requires that all topological information contained in the supertree is present in a source tree or collectively induced by several source trees. We provide simple examples to illustrate their relevance and that allow a comparison with previously advocated properties. We show that these properties can be checked in polynomial time for any given rooted supertree. Moreover,we introduce the PhySIC method (PHYlogenetic Signal with Induction and non-Contradiction). For k input trees spanning a set of n taxa, this method produces a supertree that satisfies the above-mentioned properties in O(kn3 + n4) polynomial computing time. The polytomies of the produced supertree are also tagged by labels indicating areas of conflict as well as those with insufficient overlap. As a whole, PhySIC enables the user to quickly summarize consensual information of a set of trees and localize groups of taxa for which the data requires consolidation. Lastly, we illustrate the behaviour of PhySIC on primate datasets of various sizes, and propose a supertree covering 95% of all primate extant genera. The PhySIC algorithm is available at http://atgc.lirmm.fr/cgi-bin/PhySIC/physic.cgi. [formal properties; phylogenetics; polynomial-time algorithms; primates; software; supertrees; triplets; veto methods.]
S1796	C. J. Raxworthy;C. M. Ingram;N. Rabibisoa;R. G. Pearson	2007	Applications of Ecological Niche Modeling for Species Delimitation: A Review and Empirical Evaluation using Day Geckos (Phelsuma) from Madagascar	Systematic Biology	56	6	907-923	10.1080/10635150701775111			Although the systematic utility of ecological niche modeling is generally well known (e.g., concerning the recognition and discovery of areas of endemism for biogeographic analyses), there has been little discussion of applications concerning species delimitation, and to date, no empirical evaluation has been conducted. However, ecological niche modeling can provide compelling evidence for allopatry between populations, and can also detect divergent ecological niches between candidate species. Here we present results for two taxonomically problematic groups of Phelsuma day geckos from Madagascar, where we integrate ecological niche modeling with mitochondrial DNA and morphological data to evaluate species limits. Despite relatively modest levels of genetic and morphological divergence, for both species groups we find divergent ecological niches between closely related species, and parapatric ecological niche models. Niche models based on the new species limits provide a better fit to the known distribution than models based upon the combined (lumped) species limits. Based on these results, we elevate three subspecies of Phelsuma madagascariensis to species rank, and describe a new species of Phelsuma from the P. dubia species group. Our phylogeny continues to support a major endemic radiation of Phelsuma in Madagascar, with dispersals to Pemba Island and the Mascarene Islands. We conclude that ecological niche modeling offers great potential for species delimitation, especially for taxonomic groups exhibiting low vagility and localized endemism, and for groups with more poorly known distributions. In particular, niche modeling should be especially sensitive for detecting recent parapatric speciation driven by ecological divergence, when the environmental gradients driving speciation are represented within the ecological niche models.
S1775	F. Rutschmann;T. Eriksson;K. A. Salim;E. Conti	2007	Assessing calibration uncertainty in molecular dating: The assignment of fossils to alternative calibration points	Systematic Biology	56	4	591-608	10.1080/10635150701491156			While recent methodological advances have allowed the incorporation of rate variation in molecular dating analyses, the calibration procedure, performed mainly through fossils, remains resistant to improvements. One source of uncertainty pertains to the assignment of fossils to specific nodes in a phylogeny, especially when alternative possibilities exist that can be equally justified on morphological grounds. Here we expand on a recently developed fossil cross-validation method to evaluate whether alternative nodal assignments of multiple fossils produce calibration sets that differ in their internal consistency. We use an enlarged Crypteroniaceae-centered phylogeny of Myrtales, six fossils, and 72 combinations of calibration points, termed calibration sets, to identify (i) the fossil assignments that produce the most internally consistent calibration sets and (ii) the mean ages, derived from these calibration sets, for the split of the Southeast Asian Crypteroniaceae from their West Gondwanan sister clade (node X). We found that a correlation exists between s values, devised to measure the consistency among the calibration points of a calibration set (Near and Sanderson, 2004), and nodal distances among calibration points. By ranking all sets according to the percent deviation of s from the regression line with nodal distance, we identified the sets with the highest level of corrected calibration-set consistency. These sets generated lower standard deviations associated with the ages of node X than sets characterized by lower corrected consistency. The three calibration sets with the highest corrected consistencies produced mean age estimates for node X of 79.70 mys, 79.14 mys, and 78.15 mys. These timeframes are most compatible with the hypothesis that the Crypteroniaceae stem lineage dispersed from Africa to the Deccan plate as it drifted northward during the Late Cretaceous.
S1792	M. S. Springer;A. Burk-Herrick;R. Meredith;E. Eizirik;E. Teeling;S. J. O'Brien;W. J. Murphy	2007	The Adequacy of Morphology for Reconstructing the Early History of Placental Mammals	Systematic Biology	56	4	673-684	10.1080/10635150701491149			
S1674	J. M. Waters;D. L. Rowe;S. Apte;T. M. King;G. P. Wallis;L. Anderson;R. J. Norris;D. Craw;C. P. Burridge	2007	Geological dates and molecular rates: rapid divergence of rivers and their biotas	Systematic Biology	56	2	271-282	10.1080/10635150701313855			We highlight a novel molecular clock calibration system based on geologically dated river reversal and river capture events. Changes in drainage pattern may effect vicariant isolation of freshwater taxa, and thus provide a predictive framework for associated phylogeographic study. As a case in point, New Zealand's Pelorus and Kaituna rivers became geologically isolated from the larger Wairau River system 70ˆ130 kyr BP. We conducted mitochondrial DNA phylogeographic analyses of two unrelated freshwater-limited fish taxa native to these river systems (Gobiomorphus breviceps, n = 63; Galaxias divergens, n = 95). Phylogenetic analysis of combined control region and cytochrome b sequences yielded reciprocally monophyletic clades of Pelorus-Kaituna and Wairau haplotypes for each species. Nucleotide substitution rate calibrations based on this freshwater vicariant event are substantially faster than traditionally accepted rates for fishes, but consistent with other recent inferences based on geologically young calibration points. A survey of freshwater phylogeographic literature reveals numerous examples in which the ages of recent evolutionary events may have been substantially overestimated through the use of "accepted" calibrations. We recommend that ˜ wherever possible ˜ biologists should start to reassess the conclusions of such studies by using more appropriate molecular calibrations derived from recent geological events.
S1997	N. M. Belfiore;L. Liu;C. Moritz	2008	Multilocus Phylogenetics of a Rapid Radiation in the Genus Thomomys (Rodentia: Geomyidae)	Systematic Biology	57	2	294-310	10.1080/10635150802044011			Species complexes undergoing rapid radiation present a challenge in molecular systematics because of the possibility that ancestral polymorphism is retained in component gene trees. Coalescent theory has demonstrated that gene trees often fail to match lineage trees when taxon divergence times are less than the ancestral effective population sizes. Suggestions to increase the number of loci and the number of individuals per taxon have been proposed; however, phylogenetic methods to adequately analyze these data in a coalescent framework are scarce. We compare two approaches to estimating lineage (species) trees using multiple individuals and multiple loci: the commonly used partitioned Bayesian analysis of concatenated sequences, and a modification of a newly developed hierarchical Bayesian method (BEST) that simultaneously estimates gene trees and species trees from multilocus data. We test these approaches on a phylogeny of rapidly radiating species wherein divergence times are likely to be smaller than effective population sizes, and incomplete lineage sorting is known, in the rodent genus, Thomomys. We use seven independent non-coding nuclear sequence loci (total ~ 4300 bp), and between one and 12 individuals per taxon to construct a phylogenetic hypothesis for eight Thomomys species. The majority-rule consensus tree from the partitioned concatenated analysis included 14 strongly supported bipartitions, corroborating monophyletic species status of five of the eight named species. The BEST tree strongly supported only the split between the two subgenera, and showed very low support for any other clade. Comparison of both lineage trees to individual gene trees revealed that the concatenation method appears to ignore conflicting signals among gene trees, whereas the BEST tree considers conflicting signals and downweights support for those nodes. Bayes factor analysis of posterior tree distributions from both analyses strongly favor the model underlying the BEST analysis. This comparison underscores the risks of over-reliance on results from concatenation, and ignoring the properties of coalescence, especially in cases of recent, rapid radiations.
S2114	J. E. Bond;A. K. Stockman	2008	An integrative method for delimiting cohesion species: finding the population-species interface in a group of Californian trapdoor spiders with extreme genetic divergence and geographic structuring	Systematic Biology	57	4	628-646	10.1080/10635150802302443			Here we present an objective, repeatable approach to delineating species when populations are divergent and highly structured geographically using the Californian trapdoor spider species complex Aptostichus atomarius Simon as a model system. This system is particularly difficult because under strict criteria of geographical concordance coupled with estimates of genetic divergence, an unrealistic number of population lineages would qualify as species (20-60). Our novel phylogeographic approach, which is generally applicable but particularly relevant to highly structured systems, uses genealogical exclusivity to establish a topological framework to examine lineages for genetic and ecological exchangeability in an effort to delimit cohesion species. Both qualitative assessments of habitat and niche-based distribution modeling are employed to evaluate selective regime and ecological interchangeability among genetic lineages; adaptive divergence among populations is weighted more heavily than simple geographical concordance. Based on these analyses we conclude that five cohesion species should be recognized.
S2262	C. M. Bossu;T. J. Near	2009	Gene Trees Reveal Repeated Instances of Mitochondrial DNA Introgression in Orangethroat Darters (Percidae: Etheostoma)	Systematic Biology	58	1	114-129	10.1093/sysbio/syp014			Phylogenies of closely related animal species are often inferred using mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) gene sequences. The accuracy of mtDNA gene trees is compromised through hybridization that leads to introgression of mitochondrial genomes. Utilizing DNA sequences from six single copy nuclear genes and two regions of the mitochondrial genome, we investigated the temporal and geographic signature of mitochondrial and nuclear introgression in the Etheostoma spectabile darter clade. Phylogenetic analyses of the nuclear genes result in the monophyly of the E. spectabile clade; however, with respect to sampled specimens of five species (E. fragi, E. uniporum, E. pulchellum, E. burri, and E. spectabile), the mitochondrial phylogeny is inconsistent with E. spectabile clade monophyly. Etheostoma uniporum and E. fragi are both fixed for heterospecific mitochondrial genomes. Limited nuclear introgression is restricted to E. uniporum. Our analyses show the pattern of introgression is consistently asymmetric, with movement of heterospecific mitochondrial haplotypes and nuclear alleles into E. spectabile clade species, introgressive hybridization spans broad temporal scales, and introgression is restricted to species and populations in the Ozarks. The introgressed mitochondrial genome observed in E. fragi has an obscure phylogenetic placement among darters, an ancient age, and is possibly a mitochondrial fossil from an Etheostoma species that has subsequently gone extinct. These results indicate that introgression, both ancient and more contemporaneous, characterize the history of diversification in the E. spectabile species clade, and may be relatively common among clades comprising the species-rich North American freshwater fauna.
S2006	R. T. Brumfield;L. Liu;D. E. Lum;S. V. Edwards	2008	Comparison of species tree methods for reconstructing the phylogeny of bearded manakins (Aves: Pipridae: Manacus) from multilocus sequence data	Systematic Biology	57	5	719-731	10.1080/10635150802422290			While the power of multi-locus data in estimating species trees is apparent, it is also clear that the analytical methodologies for doing so are still maturing. For example, of the methods currently available for estimating species trees from multiocus data, the Bayesian method introduced by Liu and Pearl (2007; BEST) is the only one that provides nodal support values. Using gene sequences from five nuclear loci, we explored two analytical methods (deep coalescence and BEST) to reconstruct the species tree of the five primary Manacus OTUs: M. aurantiacus, M. candei, M. vitellinus, populations of M. manacus from west of the Andes (M. manacus (w)), and populations of M. manacus from east of the Andes (M. manacus (e)). Both BEST and deep coalescence supported a sister relationship between M. vitellinus and M. manacus (w).A lower probability tree from the BEST analysis and one of the most parsimonious deep coalescence trees also supported a sister relationship between M. candei and M. aurantiacus. Because hybrid zones connect the distributions of most Manacus species, we examined the potential influence of post-divergence gene flow on the sister relationship of parapatrically distributed M. vitellinus and M. manacus (w). An isolation-with-migration (IM) analysis found relatively high levels of gene flow between M. vitellinus and M. manacus (w). Whether the gene flow is obscuring a true sister relationship between M. manacus (w) and M. manacus (e) remained unclear, pointing to the need for more detailed models accommodating multispecies, multilocus DNA sequence data.
S2060	J. W. Clayton;P. S. Soltis;D. E. Soltis	2009	Recent long-distance dispersal overshadows ancient biogeographical patterns in a pantropical angiosperm family (Simaroubaceae, Sapindales)	Systematic Biology	58	4	394-410	10.1093/sysbio/syp041			Detailed biogeographic studies of pantropical clades are still relatively few, and those conducted to date typically use parsimony or event-based methods to reconstruct ancestral areas. In this study, a recently developed likelihood method for reconstructing ancestral areas (the Dispersal-Extinction-Cladogenesis (DEC) model), is applied to the angiosperm family Simaroubaceae, a geographically widespread and ecologically diverse clade of pantropical and temperate trees and shrubs. To estimate divergence dates in the family, Bayesian uncorrelated rates analyses and robust fossil calibrations are applied to the well-sampled and strongly supported phylogeny. For biogeographic analyses, the effects of parameter configurations in the DEC model are assessed for different ancestral ranges, dispersal probabilities and the inclusion of fossils. Regardless of the parameters used, a common pattern of multiple recent range shifts overshadows reconstruction of events deeper in the family‚s history. Simaroubaceae exhibit an early history of range expansion and vicariant splits between major continental areas in the Northern Hemisphere, but reconstruction of ancestral areas for lineages diverging in the early Tertiary are sensitive to the parameters of the model used. A North American origin is suggested for the family, with use of the North Atlantic Land Bridge by ancestral taxa. In contrast to traditional views, long-distance dispersal events are common, particularly in the late Oligocene and later. Notable dispersals are inferred to have occurred across the Atlantic Ocean in both directions, as well as across the Pacific Ocean from North America to Asia, and around the Indian Ocean basin and Pacific islands. The likelihood method has proved to be a worthwhile method for examining geographic range evolution in a pantropical clade.
S2073	M. Dohrmann;D. Janussen;J. Reitner;A. G. Collins;G. Woerheide	2008	Phylogeny and evolution of glass sponges (Porifera, Hexactinellida)	Systematic Biology	57	3	388-405	10.1080/10635150802161088			Reconstructing the phylogeny of sponges (Porifera) is one of the remaining challenges to resolve the metazoan Tree of Life, and is a prerequisite for understanding early animal evolution. For two of the three extant classes of the phylum, Demospongiae and Calcarea, a number of molecular phylogenies have been published, which are largely incongruent with traditional classification systems. Those incongruencies are likely due to a paucity of informative morphological characters and high levels of homoplasy. For the third class, Hexactinellida (glass sponges)˜a group of predominantly deep-sea sponges with unusual morphology and biology˜we here present the first molecular phylogeny, along with a cladistic analysis of morphological characters. We collected 18S, 28S, and mitochondrial 16S ribosomal DNA sequences of 34 glass sponge species from 27 genera, 9 families, and 3 orders, and conducted partitioned Bayesian analyses using RNA secondary structure-specific substitution models (paired-sites models) for stem regions. Bayes factor comparisons of different paired-sites models against each other and conventional (independent-sites) models revealed a significantly better fit of the former, but contrary to previous predictions, the least parameter-rich of the tested paired-sites models provided the best fit to our data. In contrast to Demospongiae and Calcarea, our rDNA phylogeny agrees well with the traditional classification and a previously proposed phylogenetic system, which we ascribe to a more informative morphology in Hexactinellida. We find high support for a close relationship of glass sponges and demosponges, but Demospongiae sensu stricto might be paraphyletic with respect to Hexactinellida, and Homoscleromorpha is the sister group of Calcarea. Contrary to most previous findings from rDNA, we recover Porifera as monophyletic, although support for this clade is low under paired-sites models.
S1944	S. Ekman;H. L. Andersen;M. Wedin	2008	The Limitations of Ancestral State Reconstruction and the Evolution of the Ascus in the Lecanorales (Lichenized Ascomycota)	Systematic Biology	57	1	141-156	10.1080/10635150801910451			Ancestral state reconstructions of morphological or ecological traits on molecular phylogenies are becoming increasingly frequent. They rely on rate constancy over trees, a correlation between neutral genetic change and phenotypic change, as well as on adequate likelihood models and (for Bayesian methods) prior distributions. This investigation explored the outcomes of a variety of methods for ancestral state reconstruction in the ascus apex of the Lecanorales, a group containing the majority of lichen-forming ascomycetes. Evolution of this character complex has been highly controversial in lichen systematics for more than two decades. The phylogeny was estimated using Bayesian Markov chain Monte Carlo inference on DNA sequence alignments of three genes (small subunit of the mitochondrial rDNA, large subunit of the nuclear rDNA, largest subunit of RNA polymerase II).We designed a novel method for assessing the suitable number of discrete gamma categories, which relies on the effect on phylogeny estimates rather than on likelihoods. Ancestral state reconstructions were performed using maximum parsimony and maximum likelihood on a posterior tree sample as well as two fully Bayesian methods. Resulting reconstructions were often strikingly different depending on the method used; different methods often assign high confidence to different states at a given node. The two fully Bayesian methods disagree about the most probable reconstruction in about half of the nodes, even when similar likelihood models and similar priors are used. We suggest that similar studies should use several methods, awaiting an improved understanding of the statistical properties of the methods. A Lecanora-type ascus may have been ancestral in the Lecanorales. State transformations counts, obtained using stochastic mapping, indicate that the number of state changes is 12-24, which is considerably greater than the minimum three changes needed to explain the four observed ascus apex types. Apparently, the ascus in the Lecanorales is far more apt to change than has been recognized.
S1906	H. M. Hines	2008	Historical biogeography, divergence times, and diversification patterns of bumble bees (Hymenoptera: Apidae: Bombus)	Systematic Biology	57	1	58-75	10.1080/10635150801898912			Bumble bees (Bombus) are a cold-adapted, largely alpine group that can elucidate patterns of Holarctic historical biogeography, particularly in comparison to the alpine plants with which they likely coevolved. A recently published molecular phylogeny of bumble bees provides uniquely comprehensive species sampling for exploring historical patterns of distribution and diversification. Using this phylogeny and detailed data on extant distributions, I reconstruct the historical distribution of bumble bees in a temporal framework, estimating divergence times using fossil data and molecular rates derived from the literature. The nearly comprehensive phylogeny allows assessment of the tempo of diversification within the bumble bees using lineage-through-time plots and diversification statistics, which have been performed with special consideration to confidence intervals. These analyses reveal movements of Bombus concordant with geographic and climatic events of the late Cenozoic. The initial diversification of extant bumble bee lineages was estimated at around 25 ˆ 40 Ma, near the Eocene-Oligocene boundary 34 Ma, a period of dramatic global cooling. Dispersal-vicariance analysis (DIVA) predicted an Old World Bombus ancestor, with early diversification events largely restricted to the eastern Old World. The numerous intercontinental dispersal events occurred mostly in the direction of Old World to New World and North America to South America. Early movements from the Palearctic into the Nearctic most likely took place after 20 Ma, and may have coincided with a period of Miocene cooling that gave rise to taiga habitat across Beringia. Subsequent dispersal between these regions is estimated to have occurred among boreal and tundra-adapted species mostly in the last 5 million years. Radiations are estimated in both Nearctic and Neotropical regions at ~6 ˆ 8 Ma and after 3.5 Ma, concordant with the opening of land corridors between the continents.
S2152	B. Li;G. Lecointre	2009	Formalizing Reliability in the Taxonomic Congruence Approach	Zoologica Scripta	38	1	101-112	10.1111/j.1463-6409.2008.00361.x			In the "total evidence" approach to phylogenetics, the reliability of a clade is implicitly measured by its degree of support, often embodied in a robustness index such as a bootstrap proportion. In the taxonomic congruence approach, the measurement of reliability has been implemented by various consensus or supertree methods, but was seldom explicitly discussed as such. We explore a reliability index for clades using their repetition across independent data sets. All possible combinations of the elementary data sets are used to compose the sets of independent data sets across which the repetitions are counted. The more a clade occurs across such independent combinations, the higher its index. However, if other repeated clades occur that are incompatible with that clade, its index is decreased to take into account the uncertainty resulting from conflicting hypotheses. Results can be summarized through a greedy consensus tree in which clades appear according to their repetition indices. This index is tested on a 73 acanthomorph taxa data set composed of 5 independent molecular markers and multiple combinations of them. On this particular application, we confirm that reliability as defined here and robustness (estimated by bootstrap proportions obtained from a "total evidence" approach) should be clearly distinguished.
S2044	C. Li;G. Lu;G. Ortí	2008	Optimal data partitioning and a test case for ray-finned fishes (Actinopterygii) based on ten nuclear loci	Systematic Biology	57	4	519-539	10.1080/10635150802206883			Data partitioning, the combined phylogenetic analysis of homogeneous blocks of data, is a common strategy used to accommodate heterogeneities in complex multilocus data sets. Variation in evolutionary rates and substitution patterns among sites are typically addressed by partitioning data by gene, codon position, or both. Excessive partitioning of the data, however, could lead to overparameterization, therefore it seems reasonable to define smaller numbers of partitions to improve the fit of the model. We propose a new method, based on cluster analysis, to find an optimal partitioning strategy for multilocus protein-coding data sets. A heuristic exploration of alternative partitioning schemes, based on Bayesian and maximum-likelihood criteria is shown here to produce an optimal number of partitions. We tested this method using sequence data of ten nuclear genes collected from 52 ray-finned fish (Actinopterygii) and four tetrapods. The concatenated sequences included 7995 nucleotide sites split into 30 partitions defined a priori based on gene and codon position. Our results show that a model based on only 10 partitions defined by cluster analysis performed better than partitioning by both gene and codon position. Alternative data partitioning schemes also are shown to affect the topologies resulting from phylogenetic analysis, especially when Bayesian methods are used, suggesting that over-partitioning may be of major concern when Bayesian approach is used. The phylogenetic relationships among the major clades of ray-finned fish were assessed using the best data partitioning schemes under ML and Bayesian methods. Some significant results include the monophyly of „Holostei‰ (Amia and Lepisosteus), the sister-group relationships between (1) esociforms and salmoniforms, (2) osmeriforms and stomiiforms, the polyphyly of Perciformes, and a close relationship of cichlids and atherinomorphs.
S2029	J. E. Light;M. S. Hafner	2008	Codivergence in Heteromyid Rodents (Rodentia: Heteromyidae) and their Sucking Lice of the Genus Fahrenholzia (Phthiraptera: Anoplura)	Systematic Biology	57	3	449-465	10.1080/10635150802169610			Although most studies of codivergence rely primarily on topological comparisons of host and parasite phylogenies, temporal assessments are necessary to determine if divergence events in host and parasite trees occurred contemporaneously. A combination of cophylogenetic analyses and comparisons of branch lengths are used in this study to understand the host-parasite association between heteromyid rodents (Rodentia: Heteromyidae) and their sucking lice of the genus Fahrenholzia (Phthiraptera: Anoplura). Cophylogenetic comparisons based on nucleotide substitutions in the mitochondrial COI gene reveal a significant, but not perfect, pattern of cophylogeny between heteromyids and their sucking lice. Regression analyses show a significant functional relationship between the lengths of analogous branches in the host and parasite trees, indicating that divergence events in hosts and parasites were approximately contemporaneous. Thus, the topological similarity observed between heteromyids and their lice is the result of codivergence. These analyses also show that the COI gene in lice is evolving two to three times faster than the same gene in their hosts (similar to the results of studies of other lice and their vertebrate hosts) and that divergence events in lice occurred shortly after host divergence. We recommend that future studies of codivergence include temporal comparisons and, when possible, use the same molecular marker(s) in hosts and parasites to achieve the greatest insight into the history of the host-parasite relationship.
S2212	C. R. Linnen;B. D. Farrell	2008	Comparison of methods for species-tree inference in the sawfly genus Neodiprion (Hymenoptera: Diprionidae)	Systematic Biology	57	6	876-890	10.1080/10635150802580949			Conifer-feeding sawflies in the genus Neodiprion provide an excellent opportunity to investigate the origin and maintenance of barriers to reproduction, but obtaining a phylogenetic estimate for comparative studies of Neodiprion speciation has proved difficult. Specifically, nonmonophyly within and discordance between individual gene trees, both of which are common in groups that diverged recently and/or rapidly, make it impossible to infer a species tree using methods that are designed to estimate gene trees. Therefore, in this study, we estimate relationships between members of the lecontei species group using four approaches that are intended to estimate species, not gene, trees: (1) minimize deep coalescences (MDC), (2) shallowest divergences (SD), (3) Bayesian estimation of species trees (BEST), and (4) a novel approach that combines concatenation with monophyly constraints (CMC). Multiple populations are sampled for most species and all four methods incorporate this intraspecific variation into estimates of interspecific relationships. We investigate the sensitivity of each method to taxonomic sampling, and, for the BEST method, we assess the impact of prior choice on species-tree inference. We also compare species-tree estimates to one another and to a morphologically-based hypothesis to identify clades that are supported by multiple analyses and lines of evidence. We find that both taxonomic sampling and method choice impact species-tree estimates and that, for these data, the BEST method is strongly influenced by Î˘ and branch-length priors. We also find that the CMC method is the least sensitive to taxonomic sampling. Finally, while interspecific genetic variation is low due to the recent divergence of the lecontei group, our results to date suggest that incomplete lineage sorting and interspecific gene flow are the main factors complicating species-tree inference in Neodiprion. Based on these analyses, we propose a phylogenetic hypothesis for the lecontei group. Finally, our results suggest that, even for very challenging groups like Neodiprion, an underlying species-tree signal can be extracted from multi-locus data so long as intraspecific variation is adequately sampled and methods that focus on the estimation of species trees are used.
S2142	M. R. McGowen;C. Clark;J. Gatesy	2008	The vestigial olfactory receptor subgenome of odontocete whales: phylogenetic congruence between gene-tree reconciliation and supermatrix methods	Systematic Biology	57	4	574-590	10.1080/10635150802304787			The macroevolutionary transition of whales (cetaceans) from a terrestrial quadruped to an obligate aquatic form involved major changes in sensory abilities. Compared to terrestrial mammals, the olfactory system of baleen whales is dramatically reduced, and in toothed whales is completely absent. We sampled the olfactory receptor (OR) subgenomes of eight cetacean species from four families. A multigene tree of 115 newly characterized OR sequences from these eight species and published data for Bos taurus revealed a diverse array of class II OR paralogues in Cetacea. Evolution of the OR gene superfamily in toothed whales (Odontoceti) featured a multitude of independent pseudogenization events, supporting anatomical evidence that odontocetes have lost their olfactory sense. We explored the phylogenetic utility of OR pseudogenes in Cetacea, concentrating on delphinids (oceanic dolphins), the product of a rapid evolutionary radiation that has been difficult to resolve in previous studies of mitochondrial DNA sequences. Phylogenetic analyses of OR pseudogenes using both gene-tree reconciliation and supermatrix methods yielded fully-resolved, consistently-supported relationships among members of four delphinid subfamilies. Alternative minimizations of gene duplications, gene duplications plus gene losses, deep coalescence events, and nucleotide substitutions plus indels returned highly congruent phylogenetic hypotheses. Novel DNA sequence data for six single-copy nuclear loci and three mitochondrial genes (>5000 aligned nucleotides) provided an independent test of the OR trees. Nucleotide substitutions and indels in OR pseudogenes showed a very low degree of homoplasy in comparison to mitochondrial DNA and, on average, provided more variation than single-copy nuclear DNA. Our results suggest that phylogenetic analysis of the large OR superfamily will be effective for resolving relationships within Cetacea whether supermatrix or gene-tree reconciliation procedures are used.
S1978	J. A. A. Nylander;U. Olsson;P. Alström;I. Sanmartín	2008	Accounting for Phylogenetic Uncertainty in Biogeography: A Bayesian Approach to Dispersal-Vicariance Analysis of the Thrushes (Aves: Turdus)	Systematic Biology	57	2	257-268	10.1080/10635150802044003			The phylogeny of the thrushes (Aves: Turdus) has been difficult to reconstruct due to short internal branches and lack of node support for certain parts of the tree. Reconstructing the biogeographic history of this group is further complicated by the fact that current implementations of biogeographic methods, such as dispersal-vicariance analysis (DIVA; Ronquist, 1997), require a fully resolved tree. Here, we apply a Bayesian approach to dispersal-vicariance analysis that accounts for phylogenetic uncertainty and allows a more accurate analysis of the biogeographic history of lineages. Specifically, ancestral area reconstructions can be presented as marginal distributions, thus displaying the underlying topological uncertainty. Moreover, if there are multiple optimal solutions for a single node on a certain tree, integrating over the posterior distribution of trees often reveals a preference for a narrower set of solutions. We find that despite the uncertainty in tree topology, ancestral area reconstructions indicate that the Turdus clade originated in the eastern Palearctic during the Late Miocene. This was followed by an early dispersal to Africa from where a worldwide radiation took place. The uncertainty in tree topology and short branch lengths seems to indicate that this radiation took place within a limited time span during the Late Pliocene. The results support the role of Africa as a probable source area for inter-continental dispersals as suggested for other passerine groups, including basal diversification within the songbird tree.
S2163	S. R. Renner;G. W. Grimm;G. M. Schneeweiss;T. F. Stuessy;R. E. Ricklefs	2008	Rooting and dating maples (Acer) with an uncorrelated-rates molecular clock: Implications for North American/Asian disjunctions	Systematic Biology	57	5	795-808	10.1080/10635150802422282			Simulations suggest that molecular clock analyses can correctly identify the root of a tree even when the clock assumption is severely violated. Clock-based rooting of phylogenies may be particularly useful when outgroup rooting is problematic. Here, we explore relaxed-clock rooting in the Acer/Dipteronia clade of Sapindaceae, which comprises genera of highly uneven species richness and problematic mutual monophyly. Using an approach that does not presuppose rate autocorrelation between ancestral and descendant branches and hence does not require a rooted a priori topology, we analyzed data from up to seven chloroplast loci for some 50 ingroup species. For comparison, we used midpoint and outgroup rooting and dating methods that rely on rooted input trees, namely penalized likelihood, a Bayesian autocorrelated-rates model, and a strict clock. The chloroplast sequences used here reject a single global substitution rate, and the assumption of autocorrelated rates was also rejected. The root was placed between Acer and Dipteronia by all three rooting methods, albeit with low statistical support. Analyses of Acer diversification with a lineage-through-time plot and different survival models, although sensitive to missing data, suggest a gradual decrease in the average diversification rate. The nine North American species of Acer diverged from their nearest relatives at widely different times: eastern American Acer diverged in the Oligocene and Late Miocene; western American species in the Late Eocene and Mid Miocene; and the Acer core clade, including A. saccharum, dates to the Miocene. Recent diversification in North America is strikingly rare compared to diversification in eastern Asia.
S2017	C. L. Schardl;K. D. Craven;S. Speakman;A. Stromberg;A. Lindstrom;R. Yoshida	2008	A novel test for host-symbiont codivergence indicates ancient origin of fungal endophytes in grasses	Systematic Biology	57	3	483-498	10.1080/10635150802172184			Significant phylogenetic codivergence between plant or animal hosts (H) and their symbionts or parasites (P) indicate the importance of their interactions on evolutionary time scales. However, valid and realistic methods to test for codivergence are not fully developed. One of the systems where possible codivergence has been of interest involves the large subfamily of temperate grasses (Pooideae) and their endophytic fungi (epichloae). These widespread symbioses often help protect host plants from herbivory and stresses, and affect species diversity and food web structures. Here we introduce the MRCALink (mostrecent- common-ancestor link) method and use it to investigate the possibility of grass-epichloe codivergence. MRCALink applied to ultrametric H and P trees identifies all corresponding nodes for pairwise comparisons of MRCA ages. The result is compared to the space of random H and P tree pairs estimated by a Monte Carlo method. Compared to tree reconciliation the method is less dependent on tree topologies (which often can be misleading), and it crucially improves on phylogeny-independent methods such as ParaFit or the Mantel test by eliminating an extreme (but previously unrecognized) distortion of node-pair sampling. Analysis of 26 grass species-epichloe species symbioses did not reject random association of H and P MRCA ages. However, when five obvious host jumps were removed the analysis significantly rejected random association and supported grass-endophyte codivergence. Interestingly, early cladogenesis events in the Pooideae corresponded to early cladogenesis events in epichloae, suggesting concomitant origins of this grass subfamily and its remarkable group of symbionts. We also applied our method to the well-known gopher-louse data set.
S2141	C. L. Schoch;G. H. Sung;F. López-Giráldez;J. P. Townsend;J. Miadlikowska;V. Hofstetter;B. Robbertse;P. B. Matheny;F. Kauff;Z. Wang;R. Andrie;K. Trippe;L. Ciuffetti;A. Wynn;E. Fraker;B. P. Hodkinson;G. Bonito;J. Z. Groenewald;M. Arzanlou;S. d Hoog;P. W. Crous;D. Hewitt;D. H. Pfister;K. Peterson;M. Gryzenhout;M. J. Wingfield;A. Aptroot;S. O. Suh;M. Blackwell;D. M. Hillis;G. Griffith;L. Castlebury;A. Rossman;H. T. Lumbsch;R. Lücking;B. Büdel;P. Diederich;D. Ertz;D. Geiser;K. Hosaka;P. Inderbitzin;J. Kohlmeyer;B. Volkmann-Kohlmeyer;L. Mostert;K. O'Donnell;H. Sipman;J. Rogers;R. Shoemaker;J. Sugiyama;R. Summerbell;W. Untereiner;P. Johnston;S. Stenroos;A. Zuccaro;P. Dyer;P. Crittenden;R. Yahr;M. S. Cole;K. Hansen;J. M. Trappe;F. Lutzoni;J. W. Spatafora	2009	The Ascomycota Tree of Life: A Phylum-wide Phylogeny Clarifies the Origin and Evolution of Fundamental Reproductive and Ecological Traits	Systematic Biology	58	2	224-239	10.1093/sysbio/syp020			We present a 6-gene, 420-species maximum likelihood phylogeny of the Ascomycota, the largest phylum of Fungi. This analysis is the most taxonomically complete to date with species sampled from all 15 currently circumscribed classes. A number of superclass level nodes that have previously evaded resolution and were unnamed in classifications of the Fungi are resolved for the first time. Here we extend a pre-existing rankless classification to these nodes and discuss their importance in systematics and evolution of the Fungi. Based on the 6-gene phylogeny we conducted a phylogenetic informativeness analysis of all six genes and a series of ancestral character state reconstructions that focused on morphology and development of fruiting bodies, ascus dehiscence, and evolution of nutritional modes and ecologies. A gene-by-gene assessment of phylogenetic informativeness yielded higher levels of informativeness for protein genes (RPB1, RPB2, TEF1) as compared to the ribosomal genes, which have been the standard bearer in fungal systematics. A reconstruction of fruiting body characters is consistent with two origins for multicellular sexual reproductive structures in the Ascomycota, once in the common ancestor of Pezizomycotina and once in the common ancestor of Neolectomycetes. This is the first report of this finding and highlights the complicated nature of assessing homology of morphological traits across Fungi. Furthermore, ancestral reconstruction supports the exposed hymenium of the apothecium as the primitive ascocarp morphology for the Pezizomycotina with multiple derivations of the partially or completely enclosed ascocarps. Ascus dehiscence is most informative at the class level within the Pezizomycotina with superclass nodes reconstructed equivocally. Character state reconstructions support terrestrial, saprobic ecology as ancestral with multiple derivations and ecological shifts toward marine habitats and plant and animal associations. Importantly, these analyses support multiple origins of lichenization events with the loss of lichenization as less frequent and limited to terminal, closely related species.
S1972	N. Wahlberg;C. W. Wheat	2008	Genomic outposts serve the phylogenomic pioneers: designing novel nuclear markers for genomic DNA extractions of Lepidoptera	Systematic Biology	57	2	231-242	10.1080/10635150802033006			Increasing the number of characters used in phylogenetic studies is the next crucial step towards generating robust and stable phylogenetic hypotheses- i.e. strongly supported and consistent across reconstruction method. Here we describe a genomic approach to finding new protein-coding genes for systematics in non-model taxa, which can be PCR amplified from standard, slightly degraded genomic DNA extracts. We test this approach on Lepidoptera, searching the draft genomic sequence of the silk moth /Bombyx mori/, for exons > 500 bp in length, removing annotated gene families, and compared remaining exons with butterfly EST databases to identify conserved regions for primer design. These primers were tested on a set of 65 taxa primarily in the butterfly family Nymphalidae. We were able to identify and amplify 6 previously unused gene regions (Arginine Kinase, GAPDH, IDH, MDH, RpS2 and RpS5) and two rarely used gene regions (CAD and DDC) that when added to the three traditional gene regions (COI, EF-1? and wingless) gave a dataset of 8114 bp. Phylogenetic robustness and stability increased with increasing numbers of genes. Smaller taxanomic subsets were also robust when using the full gene dataset. The full 11 gene dataset was robust and stable across reconstruction methods, recovering the major lineages and strongly supporting relationships within them. Our methods and insights should be applicable to taxonomic groups having a single genomic reference species and several EST databases from taxa that diverged less than 100 million years ago.
S2259	Y. Li;S. Dressler;D. Zhang;S. S. Renner	2009	More Miocene dispersal between Africa and Asia -- the case of Bridelia (Phyllanthaceae)	Systematic Botany	34	3	521-529	10.1600/036364409789271263			Several hundred angiosperm genera range from Africa to Asia and Australia, among them Bridelia (Phyllanthaceae), with ca. 40 species, including commercially important timber trees. We here use nuclear and chloroplast DNA sequences from herbarium material, plus new collections from China, to test the monophyly of Bridelia and to infer the geologic times at which it acquired its disjunct range. For the southeast Asian mainland, within-species sampling, including material collected close to the type localities, also allowed testing current species concepts. Based on a sample of 114 chloroplast matK sequences of Phyllanthaceae, Bridelia is monophyletic and sister to an Asian clade that requires resurrecting an older generic name to make the African Cleistanthus monophyletic. Within Bridelia, gene trees from the combined data (3177 aligned nucleotides from 25 species of Bridelia plus outgroups) agree with most morphological species boundaries. Exceptions are that B. tomentosa must include B. harmandii and B. curtisii to become monophyletic and that B. fordii is distinct from B. retusa. The topology together with relaxed clock divergence times implies that Bridelia dispersed from tropical Asia to Africa once or twice between 10 and 1.85 million years ago (Ma). Australia was reached, probably from New Guinea, at least twice, both times ca. 2 Ma. Together with earlier studies, there are now at least eight cases of Neogene long distance dispersal between Africa and Asia (followed by speciation), with no directional bias apparent so far.
S2248	T. E. Roberts;E. J. Sargis;L. E. Olson	2009	Networks, Trees, and Treeshrews: Assessing Support and Identifying Conflict with Multiple Loci and a Problematic Root	Systematic Biology	58	2	257-270	10.1093/sysbio/syp025			Multiple unlinked genetic loci often provide a more comprehensive picture of evolutionary history than any single gene can, but analyzing multi-gene data presents particular challenges. Differing rates and patterns of nucleotide substitution, combined with the limited information available in any data set, can make it difficult to specify a model of evolution. In addition, conflict among loci can be the result of real differences in evolutionary process or of stochastic variance and errors in reconstruction. We used six presumably unlinked nuclear loci to investigate relationships within the mammalian family Tupaiidae (Scandentia), containing all but one of the extant tupaiid genera. We used a phylogenetic mixture model to analyze the concatenated data, and compared this to results using partitioned models. We found that more complex models were not necessarily preferred under tests using Bayes factors, and that model complexity affected both tree length and parameter variance. We also compared the results of single-gene and multi-gene analyses and used splits networks to analyze the source and degree of conflict among genes. Networks can show specific relationships that are inconsistent with each other; these conflicting and minority relationships, which are implicitly ignored or collapsed by traditional consensus methods, can be useful in identifying the underlying causes of topological uncertainty. In our data, conflict is concentrated around particular relationships, not widespread throughout the tree. This pattern is further clarified by considering conflict surrounding the root separately from conflict within the ingroup. Uncertainty in rooting may be because of the apparent evolutionary distance separating these genera and our outgroup, the tupaiid genus Dendrogale. Unlike a previous mitochondrial study, these nuclear data strongly suggest that the genus Tupaia is not monophyletic with respect to the monotypic Urogale, even when uncertainty about rooting is taken into account. These data concur with mtDNA on other relationships, including the close affinity of T. tana with the enigmatic T. splendidula and of T. belangeri with T. glis. We also discuss the taxonomic and biogeographic implications of these results.
S2263	P. Q. Spinks;H. B. Shaffer	2009	Conflicting Mitochondrial and Nuclear Phylogenies For The Widely Disjunct Emys (Testudines: Emydidae) Species Complex, And What They Tell Us About Biogeography And Hybridization	Systematic Biology	58	1	1-20	10.1093/sysbio/syp005			Understanding the mechanisms by which widely disjunct members of a clade came to occupy their current distribution is one of the fundamental challenges of biogeography. Here, we used data from seven nuclear and one mitochondrial gene to examine the phylogenetic and biogeographic history of Emys, a clade of turtles that is broadly disjunct in western and eastern North America and Europe. We found strong disagreement between mitochondrial and nuclear gene trees, with mitochondrial DNA supporting the monophyly of the North American taxa (marmorata + blandingii) to the exclusion of the European orbicularis, and nuclear genes supporting the monophyly of (blandingii + orbicularis) to the exclusion of marmorata. We used fossil-calibrated molecular chronograms, in combination with supporting evidence from the fossil record and paleoclimatology, to identify a potential example of ancient hybridization and mitochondrial gene capture 12 million years ago that explains this discrepancy. Based on the weight of evidence, we argue that the invasion of Eurasia by E. orbicularis occurred about 16 Ma via a trans-Beringian land bridge. The case of Emys emphasizes how single gene trees can be strongly affected by population processes including hybridization, and that these processes can persist through long periods of evolutionary history. Given the chaotic state of the current taxonomy of these turtles, our work also emphasizes the care that should be used in implementing taxonomic changes based on one or a few gene trees and the importance of taking a conservative approach to renaming or splitting higher taxa based on apparent non-monophyly.
S2473	D. R. Hansen;G. S. Spicer;R. Patterson	2009	Phylogenetic Relationships between and within Phacelia Sections Whitlavia and Gymnobythus (Boraginaceae)	Systematic Biology	34	4	737-746	10.1600/036364409790139637			Phylogenetic relationships between and within Phacelia sections Whitlavia and Gymnobythus are inferred based on nuclear ribosomal DNA [5.8S, and flanking internal transcribed spacers (ITS) 1 and 2] and chloroplast DNA (rpl16) sequences. These two sections share morphological characters and have been thought to be closely related. The purpose of this study is to test whether the two sections are monophyletic as well as whether they form sister clades. Our results indicate that the two sections do not form sister clades, and that section Gymnobythus is monophyletic but Whitlavia is not. The members of Whitlavia form two clades, one of which is sister to a clade that contains section Gymnobythus. The data indicate hybridization or a recent divergence between Phacelia parryi and Phacelia minor, as well as a close alliance between Phacelia longipes and Phacelia campanularia.
S2385	W. J. Baker;V. Savolainen;C. B. Asmussen-Lange;M. W. Chase;J. Dransfied;F. Forest;M. M. Harley;N. W. Uhl;M. Wilkinson	2009	Complete Generic Level Phylogenetic Analyses of Palms (Arecaceae) with Comparisons of Supertree and Supermatrix Approaches	Systematic Biology	58	2	240-256	10.1093/sysbio/syp021			Supertree and supermatrix methods have great potential in the quest to build the Tree of Life and yet they remain controversial, with most workers opting for one approach or the other, but rarely both. Here we employed both methods to construct phylogenetic trees of all genera of palms (Arecaceae/Palmae), an iconic angiosperm family of great economic importance. We assembled a supermatrix consisting of 16 partitions, comprising DNA sequence data, plastid RFLP data and morphological data for all genera, from which a highly resolved and well-supported phylogenetic tree was built despite abundant missing data. To construct supertrees, we used variants of MRP analysis based on input trees generated directly from subsamples of the supermatrix. All supertrees were highly resolved. Standard MRP with bootstrap weighted matrix elements performed most effectively in this case, generating trees with greatest congruence with the supermatrix tree and fewest clades unsupported by any input tree. Non-independence due to input trees based on combinations of data partitions was an acceptable trade-off for improvements in supertree performance. Irreversible MRP and the use of strictly independent input trees only provided no obvious benefits. Contrary to previous claims, we found that unsupported clades are not infrequent under some MRP implementations with up to 13% of clades lacking support from any input tree in some irreversible MRP supertrees. To build a formal synthesis, we assessed the cross-corroboration between supermatrix trees and the variant supertrees using semi-strict consensus, enumerating shared clades and compatible clades. The semi-strict consensus of the supermatrix tree and the most congruent supertree contained 160 clades (of a maximum of 204), 137 of which were present in both trees. The relationships recovered by these trees strongly support the current phylogenetic classification of palms. We evaluate two composite supertree support measures (rQS and V) and conclude that it is more informative to report numbers of input trees that support or conflict with a given supertree clade. This study demonstrates that supertree and supermatrix methods can provide effective, explicit and complimentary mechanisms for synthesising disjointed phylogenetic evidence while emphasising the need for further refinement of supertree methods. KEY WORDS Palmae; Arecaceae; supertree; supermatrix; phylogeny; matrix representation with parsimony (MRP); congruence.
S2421	N. B. Fröbisch;R. R. Schoch	2009	Testing the Impact of Miniaturization on Phylogeny: Paleozoic Dissorophoid Amphibians	Systematic Biology	58	3	312-327	10.1093/sysbio/syp029			Among the diverse clade of Paleozoic dissorophoid amphibians, the small, terrestrial amphibamids and the neotenic branchiosaurids have frequently been suggested as possible antecedents of either all or some of the modern amphibian clades. Classically amphibamids and branchiosaurids have been considered to represent distinct, but closely related clades within dissorophoids, but despite their importance for the controversial lissamphibian origins, a comprehensive phylogenetic analysis of small dissorophoids has thus far not been attempted. On the basis of an integrated dataset, the relationships of amphibamids and branchiosaurids were analyzed using parsimony and Bayesian approaches. Both groups represent miniaturized forms and it was tested whether similar developmental pathways, associated with miniaturization, lead to an artificial close relationship of branchiosaurids and amphibamids. Moreover, the fit of the resulting tree topologies to the distribution of fossil taxa in the stratigraphic rock record was assessed as an additional source of information. The results show that characters associated with a miniaturized morphology are not responsible for the close clustering of branchiosaurids and amphibamids. Instead, all analyses invariably demonstrate a monophyletic clade of branchiosaurids highly nested within derived amphibamids, indicating that branchiosaurids represent a group of secondarily neotenic amphibamid dissorophoids. This understanding of the phylogenetic relationships of small dissorophoid amphibians provides a new framework for the discussion of their evolutionary history and the evolution of characters shared by branchiosaurids and/or amphibamids with modern amphibian taxa.
S2307	M. E. Siddall;F. M. Fontanella;S. C. Watson;S. Kvist;C. Erséus	2009	Barcoding Bamboozled by Bacteria: Convergence to Metazoan Mitochondrial Primer Targets by Marine Microbes	Systematic Biology	58	4	445-451	10.1093/sysbio/syp033			DNA barcoding has become a legitimate tool for assessment of global biodiversity patterns in a manner intended to allow diagnoses of known species to non-taxonomists. Relying on a standardized region (∼ 650 nucleotides) of the cytochrome c oxidase subunit I mitochondrial gene (COI), a variety of taxon-based initiatives (www.barcoding.si.edu/major_projects.html), as well as large-scale locality-based barcoding projects (e.g., bscit.berkeley.edu/biocode/), are well underway. If DNA barcoding is to achieve its promise, these projects are essential as they will provide much-needed comparative baseline data for taxonomic groups, or for regional assemblages, upon which future identification efforts will rely. Thorough coverage of clades and guilds is essential to the success of DNA barcoding, but so too is highly accurate taxonomic identification of the source organisms. Although surreptitious amplification of nuclear mitochondrial pseudogenes (numts) may lead the unwary to overestimation of species diversity (Song et al. 2008), it may not necessarily lead to incorrect taxonomic determinations so long as the source organism was accurately identified. Erroneous taxonomic identification of a reference organism is a more serious problem (Vilgalys 2003; Traub et al. 2007), yet one that can be mostly mitigated by expert identification and appropriate deposition of reference specimens in natural history collections (Smith et al. 2008). Even when great care is taken to avoid contamination, inadvertent amplification of surface-adhering or tissue-infecting organisms may be impossible to avoid (e.g., Zhang et al. 1997; Nilsson et al. 2006). As such, underlying broad barcoding efforts is a presumption that the primers used are more likely to amplify the animal of interest than they are likely to amplify (e.g.) an unobserved bacterial or fungal contaminant. The LCO1490 and HCO2198 primers that provided the basis for the DNA barcoding standard were described by Folmer et al. (1994) as being “universal” for 11 invertebrate phyla.
S2436	L. Leclere;P. Schuchert;C. Cruaud;A. Couloux;M. Manuel	2009	Molecular Phylogenetics of Thecata (Hydrozoa, Cnidaria) Reveals Long-Term Maintenance of Life History Traits Despite High Frequency of Recent Character Changes	Systematic Biology	58	5	509-526	10.1093/sysbio/syp044			Two fundamental life cycle types are recognized among hydrozoan cnidarians, the benthic (generally colonial) polyp stage either producing pelagic sexual medusae or directly releasing gametes elaborated from an attached gonophore. The existence of intermediate forms, with polyps producing simple medusoids, has been classically considered compelling evidence in favor of phyletic gradualism. In order to gain insights about the evolution of hydrozoan life history traits, we inferred phylogenetic relationships of 142 species of Thecata (= Leptothecata, Leptomedusae), the most species-rich hydrozoan group, using three different rRNA markers (16S, 18S, 28S). In conflict with morphology-derived classifications, most thecate species fell in two well-supported clades named here Statocysta and Macrocolonia. We inferred many independent medusa losses among Statocysta. Several instances of secondary regain of medusoids (but not of full medusa) from medusa-less ancestors were supported among Macrocolonia. Furthermore, life cycle character changes were significantly correlated with changes affecting colony shape. For both traits, changes did not reflect graded and progressive loss or gain of complexity, they were concentrated in recent branches, with intermediate character states being most probably relatively short-lived at a large evolutionary scale. This punctuational pattern supports the existence of two alternative stable evolutionary strategies: simple stolonal colonies with medusae (the ancestral strategy, seen in most Statocysta species) vs. large complex colonies with fixed gonophores (the derived strategy, seen in most Macrocolonia species). Hypotheses of species selection are proposed to explain the apparent long-term stability of these life history traits despite a high frequency of character change. Notably, maintenance of the medusa across geological time in Statocysta might be due to higher extinction rates for species that have lost this dispersive stage.
S2457	A. D. Leaché	2009	Species Tree Discordance Traces to Phylogeographic Clade Boundaries in North American Fence Lizards (Sceloporus)	Systematic Biology	58	6	547–559	10.1093/sysbio/syp057			I investigated the impacts of phylogeographic sampling decisions on species tree estimation in the Sceloporus undulatus species group, a recent radiation of small, insectivorous lizards connected by para- and peripatric distribution across North America, using a variety of species tree inference methods (BEST, BUCKy and minimize deep coalescences). Phylogenetic analyses of 16 specimens representing four putative species within S. undulatus using complete (8 loci, > 5.5kb) and incomplete (29 loci; > 23.6 kb) nuclear datasets result in species trees that share features with the mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) genealogy at the phylogeographic level, but provide new insights into the evolutionary history of the species group. The concatenated nuclear data and mtDNA data both recover four major clades connecting populations across North America; however, instances of discordance are localized at the contact zones between adjacent phylogeographic groups. A random sub-sampling experiment designed to vary the phylogeographic samples included across hundreds of replicate species tree inferences suggests that inaccurate species assignments can result in inferred phylogenetic relationships that are dependent upon which particular populations are used as exemplars to represent species and can lead to increased estimates of effective population size (&#920;). For the phylogeographic data presented here, reassigning specimens with introgressed mtDNA genomes to their prospective species, or excluding them from the analysis altogether, produce species tree topologies that are distinctly different from analyses that utilize mtDNA-based species assignments. Evolutionary biologists working at the interface of phylogeography and phylogenetics are likely to encounter multiple processes influencing gene trees congruence, which increases the relevance of estimating species trees with multilocus nuclear data and models that accommodate incomplete deep coalescence.
S2474	M. D. Pirie;A. M. Humphreys;N. P. Barker;H. P. Linder	2009	Reticulation, data combination and inferring evolutionary history: an example from Danthonioideae	Systematic Biology	58	6	612-628	10.1093/sysbio/syp068			We explore the potential impact of conflicting gene trees on inferences of evolutionary history above the species level. When conflict between gene trees is discovered, it is common practice either to analyze the data separately, or to combine the data having excluded the conflicting taxa or data partitions for those taxa (which are then recoded as missing). We demonstrate an alternative approach, which involves duplicating conflicting taxa in the matrix, such that each duplicate is represented by one partition only. This allows the combination of all available data in standard phylogenetic analyses, despite reticulations. We show how interpretation of contradictory gene trees can lead to conflicting inferences of both morphological evolution and biogeographic history, using the example of the pampas grasses, Cortaderia. The characteristic morphological syndrome of Cortaderia can be inferred as having arisen multiple times (chloroplast: cpDNA), or just once (nuclear: nrDNA). The distributions of species of Cortaderia and related genera in Australia/New Guinea, New Zealand, and South America can be explained by few (nrDNA), or several (cpDNA) dispersals between the southern continents. These contradictions can be explained by past hybridization events which have linked gains of complex morphologies with unrelated chloroplast lineages and have erased evidence of dispersals from the nuclear genome. Given the discrepancies between inferences based on the gene trees individually, we urge the use of approaches such as ours that take multiple gene trees into account.
S2467	M. E. Steeman;M. B. Hebsgaard;R. E. Fordyce;S. Ho;D. L. Rabosky;R. Nielsen;C. Rahbek;H. Glenner;M. V. Sørensen;E. Willerslev	2009	Radiation of Extant Cetaceans Driven by Restructuring of the Oceans	Systematic Biology	58	6	573-585	10.1093/sysbio/syp060			The remarkable fossil record of whales and dolphins (Cetacea) has made them an exemplar of macroevolution. Although their overall adaptive transition from terrestrial to fully aquatic organisms is well known, this is not true of the radiation of modern whales. Here, we explore the diversification of extant cetaceans by constructing a robust molecular phylogeny that includes 87 of 89 extant species. The phylogeny and divergence times are derived from nuclear and mitochondrial markers, calibrated with fossils. We find that the toothed whales are monophyletic, suggesting that echolocation evolved only once early in that lineage some 36-34 million years ago (Ma). The rorqual family (Balaenopteridae) is restored with the exclusion of the gray whale, suggesting that gulp-feeding evolved 18-16 Ma. Delphinida, comprising all living dolphins and porpoises other than the Ganges/Indus dolphins, originated about 26 Ma; it contains the taxonomically rich delphinids, which began diversifying less than 11 Ma. We tested two hypothesized drivers of the extant cetacean radiation by assessing the tempo of lineage accumulation through time. We find no support for a rapid burst of speciation early in the history of extant whales, contrasting with expectations of an adaptive-radiation model. However, we do find support for increased diversification rates during periods of pronounced physical restructuring of the oceans. The results imply that paleogeographic and paleoceanographic changes, such as closure of major seaways, have influenced the dynamics of radiation in extant cetaceans.
S2376	T. M. Townsend;D. R. Vieites;F. Glaw;M. Vences	2009	Testing Species-Level Diversification Hypotheses in Madagascar: The Case of Microendemic Brookesia Leaf Chameleons	Systematic Biology	58	6	641-656	10.1093/sysbio/syp073			Madagascar s flora and fauna are remarkable both for their diversity and supraspecific endemism. Moreover, many taxa contain large numbers of species with limited distributions. Several hypotheses have been proposed to explain this high level of microendemism, including (1) riverine barrier, (2) mountain-refuge, and (3) watershed contraction hypotheses, the latter two of which center on fragmentation due to climatic shifts associated with Pliocene/Pleistocene glaciation. The Malagasy leaf chameleon genus Brookesia is a speciose group with a high proportion of microendemic taxa, thus making it an excellent candidate to test these vicariance scenarios. We used mitochondrial and nuclear sequence data to construct a Brookesia phylogeny, and temporal concordance with Pliocene/Pleistocene speciation scenarios was tested by estimating divergence dates using a relaxed-clock Bayesian method. We strongly reject a role for Pliocene/Pleistocene climatic fluctuations in species-level diversification of Brookesia. We also used simulations to test the spatial predictions of the watershed-contraction model in a phylogenetic context, independent of its temporal component, and found no statistical support for this model. The riverine-barrier model is likewise a qualitatively poor fit to our data, but some relationships support a more ancient mountain-refuge effect. We assessed support for the three hypotheses in a non-phylogenetic context by examining altitude and species richness, and found a significant positive correlation between these variables. This is consistent with a mountain-refuge effect, but does not support the watershed-contraction or riverine-barrier models. Finally, we find repeated higher-level east-west divergence patterns (a) between the two sister clades comprising the B. minima group and (b) within the clade of larger leaf chameleons, which shows a basal divergence between western and eastern/northern sister clades. Our results highlight the central role of phylogeny in any meaningful tests of species-level diversification theories.
S2403	D. San Mauro;D. J. Gower;T. Massingham;M. Wilkinson;R. Zardoya;J. A. Cotton	2009	Experimental design in caecilian systematics: phylogenetic information of mitochondrial genomes and nuclear rag1	Systematic Biology	58		425-438	10.1093/sysbio/syp043			In molecular phylogenetic studies, a major aspect of experimental design concerns the choice of markers and taxa. While previous studies have investigated the phylogenetic performance of different genes and the effectiveness of increasing taxon sampling, their conclusions are partly contradictory, probably because they are highly context specific and dependent on the group of organisms used in each study. Goldman (1998) introduced a method for experimental design in phylogenetics based on the expected information to be gained that has barely been used in practice. Here we use this method to explore the phylogenetic utility of mitochondrial (mt) genes, mt genomes, and nuclear rag1 for studies of the systematics of caecilian amphibians, as well as the effect of taxon addition on the stabilization of a controversial branch of the tree. Overall phylogenetic information estimates per gene, specific estimates per branch of the tree, estimates for combined (mitogenomic) data sets, and estimates as a hypothetical new taxon is added to different parts of the caecilian tree are calculated and compared. In general, the most informative data sets are those for mt transfer and ribosomal RNA genes. Our results also show at which positions in the caecilian tree the addition of taxa have the greatest potential to increase phylogenetic information with respect to the controversial relationships of Scolecomorphus, Boulengerula, and all other teresomatan caecilians. These positions are, as intuitively expected, mostly (but not all) adjacent to the controversial branch. Generating whole mitogenomic and rag1 data for additional taxa joining the Scolecomorphus branch may be a more efficient strategy than sequencing a similar amount of additional nucleotides spread across the current caecilian taxon sampling. The methodology employed in this study allows an a priori evaluation and testable predictions of the appropriateness of particular experimental designs to solve specific questions at different levels of the caecilian phylogeny.
S2499	R. Duno de Stefano;G. Carnevali Fernández-Concha;L. Lorena Can-Itza;M. Lavin	2010	The Morphological and Phylogenetic Distinctions of Coursetia greenmanii (Leguminosae): Taxonomic and Ecological Implications	Systematic Biology	35	2	286-295	10.1600/036364410791638360			A new combination, Coursetia greenmanii (Leguminosae, Papilinioideae, tribe Robinieae), is proposed because analysis of nucleotide sequence data from the nuclear ribosomal internal transcribed spacer region resolves a clade that is phenotypically distinct and ecologically and geographically centered in lowland seasonally dry tropical vegetation of the region of the Yucatan Peninsula. The well supported monophyly of the ribosomal sequences sampled from Coursetia greenmanii suggests that this species has had a long history independent of other close relatives including the sympatric Coursetia caribaea, which shows niche conservatism to the same seasonally dry tropical vegetation. Coalescence of intraspecific samples of ribosomal sequences from this narrowly distributed species is possibly related to the high levels of dispersal limitation within seasonally dry tropical forests. The geographical phylogenetic structure found for Coursetia greenmanii represents the general case for species of the genus Coursetia and closely related genera of the tribe Robinieae, most of which coalesce with respect to nuclear ribosomal sequence variation and are geographically concentrated in relatively small subregions of seasonally dry Neotropical vegetation that is rich in cacti and other succulent species.
S2507	D. C. Marshall	2010	Cryptic Failure of Partitioned Bayesian Phylogenetic Analyses: Lost in the Land of Long Trees	Systematic Biology	59	1	108-117	10.1093/sysbio/syp080			Partitioned Bayesian phylogenetic analyses of routine genetic datasets, constructed using MrBayes (Ronquist and Huelsenbeck, 2003), can become trapped in regions of parameter space characterized by unrealistically long trees and distorted partition-rate multipliers. Such analyses commonly fail to reach stationarity during hundreds of millions of generations of sampling many times longer than most published analyses. Some datasets are so prone to this problem that paired MrBayes runs begun from different starting trees repeatedly find the same incorrect long-tree solutions and consequently pass the most commonly employed tests of stationarity, including the ASDSF and PSRF statistics offered by MrBayes (Gelman and Rubin, 1992). In these situations, failure to reach stationarity is recognizable only in light of prior knowledge of model parameters, such as the expectation that third-codon-position sites usually evolve fastest in protein-coding genes. The conditions that lead to the long-tree problem are frequently encountered in phylogenetic studies today, and I present six demonstration examples from the literature. Although the effects on tree length are often dramatic, effects on topology appear to be subtle. Susceptibility to the problem is sometimes predicted by the difference between the true tree length and the starting tree length. In some cases, the problems described here can be avoided or reduced by manipulation of the starting tree length and/or by adjustments to the prior on branch lengths. In more difficult situations, accurate branch length estimation may not be possible with Bayesian methods because of dependence of the solution on the branch length prior.
S2528	M. J. Phillips;G. C. Gibb;E. A. Crimp;D. Penny	2010	Tinamous and moa flock together: mitochondrial genome sequence analysis reveals independent losses of flight among ratites	Systematic Biology	59	1	90-107	10.1093/sysbio/syp079			Ratites are large, flightless birds and include the ostrich, rheas, kiwi, emu and cassowaries, along with extinct members, such as moa and elephant-birds. Previous phylogenetic analyses of complete mitochondrial genome sequences have reinforced the traditional belief that ratites are monophyletic and tinamous are their sister group. However, in these studies ratite monophyly was enforced in the analyses that modelled rate heterogeneity among variable sites. Relaxing this topological constraint results in strong support for the tinamous (which fly) nesting within ratites. Furthermore, upon reducing base compositional bias and partitioning models of sequence evolution among protein codon positions and RNA structures, the tinamou-moa clade grouped with kiwi, emu and cassowaries to the exclusion of the successively more divergent rheas and ostrich. These relationships are consistent with recent results from a large nuclear dataset, while our strongly supported finding of a tinamou-moa grouping further resolves palaeognath phylogeny. We infer flight to have been lost among ratites multiple times in temporally close association with the Cretaceous-Tertiary extinction event. This circumvents requirements for transient micro-continents and island chains to explain discordance between ratite phylogeny and patterns of continental break-up. Ostriches may have dispersed to Africa from Eurasia, putting in question the status of Ratites as an iconic Gondwanan relict taxon.
S2504	R. C. Thomson;H. B. Shaffer	2010	Sparse Supermatrices for Phylogenetic Inference: Taxonomy, Alignment, Rogue Taxa, and the Phylogeny of Living Turtles	Systematic Biology	59	1	42-58	10.1093/sysbio/syp075			As phylogenetic datasets grow in size and number, objective methods to summarize this information are becoming increasingly important. Supermatrices can combine existing data directly, and in principle provide effective syntheses of phylogenetic information that may reveal new relationships. However, several serious difficulties exist in the construction of large supermatrices that must be overcome before these approaches will enjoy broad utility. We present analyses that examine the performance of sparse supermatrices constructed from large sequence databases for the reconstruction of species-level phylogenies. We develop a largely automated informatics pipeline that allows for the construction of sparse supermatrices from GenBank data. In doing so, we develop novel strategies for alleviating some of the outstanding impediments to accurate phylogenetic inference using these approaches. These include taxonomic standardization, automated alignment, and the identification of rogue taxa. We use turtles as an exemplar clade and present a well-supported species-level phylogeny for two thirds of all turtle species based on a ~50kb supermatrix consisting of 93% missing data. Finally, we discuss some of the remaining pitfalls and concerns associated with supermatrix analyses, provide comparisons to supertree approaches, and suggest areas for future research.
S2509	R. P. Brown;Z. Yang	2010	Bayesian Dating of Shallow Phylogenies with a Relaxed Clock	Systematic Biology	59	2	119-131	10.1093/sysbio/syp082			Bayesian methods are increasingly being used to estimate divergence times without the restrictive assumption of a global clock. Little is known about their reliability for shallow phylogenies where DNA sequence divergence is low. We analyzed both simulated and real sequence to evaluate dating methods in phylogenies with mid-late Miocene roots. A large number of data sets (5000) with ten taxa each were simulated under a rate drift model for trees with two topologies (balanced or unbalanced) and with different sets of divergence times (characterized by long or short external branches). Data were analyzed using Bayesian Markov chain Monte Carlo methods in which the prior on divergence times was specified from a birth-death process with species sampling (BDS) or a Dirichlet distribution, using the programs MCMCTREE and MULTIDIVTIME. The programs generally performed well on shallow phylogenies, but posterior mean node ages were biased and 95% posterior intervals included true ages in fewer than 95% of trees, in some analyses. This typically occurred when the 95% prior interval did not include the true age and/or sequence lengths were less than 1Kbp. Widths of posterior intervals were also very dependent on the position of the calibrated node within the tree, particularly when sequences were short. Different divergence times priors within MCMCTREE, MULTIDIVTIME and BEAST were used to analyze mtDNA data sets from a Bovid subfamily (the Caprinae), from Asian Laudakia and North African Chalcides lizards. Posterior divergence times were quite sensitive to different BDS priors, but less sensitive to different Dirichlet priors. Our study demonstrates the impact of the prior on divergence times in shallow phylogenies and shows that: 1) prior intervals on nodes should be assessed as a prerequisite to a dating analysis, 2) greater than 1 Kbp of quite rapidly-evolving sequence may be required to obtain accurate posterior means and usefully narrow posterior intervals.
S2511	S. Klopfstein;C. Kropf;D. L. J. Quicke	2010	An Evaluation of Phylogenetic Informativeness Profiles and the Molecular Phylogeny of Diplazontinae (Hymenoptera, Ichneumonidae)	Systematic Biology	59	2	226-241	10.1093/sysbio/syp105			How to quantify the phylogenetic information content of a dataset is a longstanding question in phylogenetics, influencing both the assessment of data quality in completed studies and the planning of future phylogenetic projects. Recently, Townsend (2007, Profiling Phylogenetic Informativeness. Syst.Biol. 56, pp. 222-231) developed a method to profile the phylogenetic informativeness of a dataset through time by linking its site-specific rates of change to its power to resolve relationships at different time scales. Here, we evaluate the performance of Townsend s method in the case of two standard genetic markers for phylogenetic reconstruction, 28S rDNA and CO1 mtDNA, with maximum-parsimony, maximum-likelihood and Bayesian analyses of relationships within a group of parasitoid wasps (Hym.: Ichneumonidae, Diplazontinae). Retrieving phylogenetic informativeness profiles of the two genes from our own and from three additional datasets, we find that the method repeatedly overestimates the performance of the more quickly evolving CO1 compared to 28S. We explore possible reasons for this bias, including phylogenetic uncertainty, violation of the molecular clock assumption, model misspecification and nonstationary nucleotide composition. As none of these provides a sufficient explanation of the observed discrepancy, we use simulated datasets, based on an idealized setting, to show that the optimum evolutionary rate decreases with increasing number of taxa. We suggest that this relationship could explain why the formula derived by Townsend from the four-taxon case overrates the performance of higher versus lower rates of evolution in our case, and that caution should be taken when the method is applied to datasets including more than four taxa.
S2522	K. G. Ross;D. Gotzek;M. S. Ascunce;D. D. Shoemaker	2010	Species delimitation: A case study in a problematic ant taxon	Systematic Biology	59	2	162-184	10.1093/sysbio/syp089			Species delimitation has been invigorated as a discipline in systematics by an influx of new character sets, analytical methods, and conceptual advances. We use genetic data from 68 markers, combined with distributional, bioclimatic, and coloration information, to hypothesize boundaries of evolutionarily independent lineages (species) within the widespread and highly variable nominal fire ant species Solenopsis saevissima, a member of a species-group containing invasive pests as well as organisms regarded as models for ecological and evolutionary research. Our integrated approach uses diverse methods of analysis to sequentially test whether populations meet specific operational criteria (contingent properties) for candidacy as morphologically cryptic species, including genetic clustering, monophyly, reproductive isolation, and occupation of distinctive niche space. We hypothesize that nominal S. saevissima comprises at least four to six previously unrecognized species, including several pairs whose parapatric distributions implicate the development of intrinsic premating or postmating barriers to gene flow. Our genetic data further suggest that regional genetic differentiation in S. saevissima has been influenced by hybridization with other nominal species occurring in sympatry or parapatry, including the quite distantly related S. geminata. The results of this study illustrate the importance of employing different classes of genetic data (coding and non-coding regions; nuclear and mtDNA markers), different methods of genetic data analysis (tree-based and non-tree-based methods), and different sources of data (genetic, morphological, and ecological data) to explicitly test various operational criteria for species boundaries in clades of recently diverged lineages, while warning against over reliance on any single data type (e.g., mtDNA sequence variation) when drawing inferences.
S2515	A. Stern;I. Mayrose;O. Penn;S. Shaul;U. Gophna;T. Pupko	2010	An Evolutionary Analysis of Lateral Gene Transfer in Thymidylate Synthase Enzymes	Systematic Biology	59	2	212-225	10.1093/sysbio/syp104			Thymidylate synthases (Thy) are key enzymes in the synthesis of deoxythymidylate, one of the four building blocks of DNA. As such, they are essential for all DNA-based forms of life, and therefore implicated in the hypothesized transition from RNA genomes to DNA genomes. Two evolutionally unrelated Thy enzymes, ThyA and ThyX, are known to catalyze the same biochemical reaction. Both enzymes are sporadically distributed within each of the three domains of life in a pattern that suggests multiple non-homologous lateral gene transfer (LGT) events. We present a phylogenetic analysis of the evolution of the two enzymes, aimed at unraveling their entangled evolutionary history and tracing their origin back to early life. A novel probabilistic evolutionary model was developed, which allowed us to compute the posterior probabilities and the posterior expectation of the number of LGT events. Simulation studies were performed to validate the model's ability to accurately detect LGT events, which have occurred throughout a large phylogeny. Applying the model to the Thy data revealed widespread non-homologous LGT between and within all three domains of life. By reconstructing the ThyA and ThyX gene trees, the most likely donor of each LGT event was inferred. The role of viruses in LGT of Thy is finally discussed.
S2348	P. S. Ward;S. G. Brady;B. L. Fisher;T. R. Schultz	2010	Phylogeny and biogeography of dolichoderine ants: effects of data partitioning and relict taxa on historical inference	Systematic Biology	59	3	342-362	10.1093/sysbio/syq012			Ants (Hymenoptera: Formicidae) are conspicuous organisms in most terrestrial ecosystems, often attaining high levels of abundance and diversity. In this study we investigate the evolutionary history of a major clade of ants, the subfamily Dolichoderinae, whose species frequently achieve ecological dominance in ant communities. This group has also produced some of the world s most successful invasive ants. We use an extensive molecular data set (~9kb of sequence data from 10 nuclear genes, covering 48 dolichoderine species and 6 outgroup taxa) to infer the phylogenetic relationships, divergence dates, and biogeographic history of these ants. We evaluate the effects of data partitioning and outgroup composition on phylogenetic inference by estimating relationships under a series of increasingly partitioned data sets and by running analyses both with and without Aneuretus simoni, a rare and localized species that is the nearest living relative of Dolichoderinae. We also examine the effects of excluding two data partitions with significant base composition heterogeneity. Our results reveal four well-supported and mutually exclusive clades of dolichoderines, corresponding to four newly defined tribes: Bothriomyrmecini (B), Dolichoderini (D), Leptomyrmecini (L) and Tapinomini (T). All Bayesian and likelihood analyses yield the same unrooted (ingroup-only) topology, ((D,L),(B,T)), with the outgroups attaching either on the Dolichoderini branch or the Tapinomini branch. Placement of the root is highly sensitive to choice of model partition and to inclusion/exclusion of Aneuretus. Bayes factors strongly favor the more partitioned models and in these Tapinomini is recovered as sister to the remaining dolichoderines, but only if Aneuretus is included. Exclusion of Aneuretus precludes recovery of this topology, underscoring the importance of relict, taxonomically isolated taxa for phylogenetic inference. Removal of the two partitions with heterogeneous base composition also markedly increases support for placement of the root on the Tapinomini branch. Our divergence date estimates and biogeographic analyses indicate that crown group dolichoderines arose about 65 million years ago (Ma), although this was preceded by a substantial period (30 million years) of stem group evolution. The four extant tribes are estimated to have crown group origins in the late Paleocene or Eocene (40-60 Ma). Tapinomini and Bothriomyrmecini originated in the Paleotropics and subsequently dispersed to other biogeographic regions. Crown group Leptomyrmecini arose and diversified in the Neotropics, but they also gave rise to one clade that colonized Australia about 30 Ma and subsequently experienced a massive radiation on that continent. This event occurred later than the diversification of dolichoderines in the northern hemisphere, so that by the time dolichoderines came to dominate the Australian fauna they had already declined in abundance in the Holarctic region.
S2545	J. M. Waters;D. L. Rowe;C. P. Burridge;G. P. Wallis	2010	Gene trees versus species trees: reassessing life-history evolution in a freshwater fish radiation	Systematic Biology	59	5	504-517	10.1093/sysbio/syq031			Mechanisms of speciation are best understood in the context of phylogenetic relationships, and as such have often been inferred from single gene trees, typically those derived from mtDNA markers. Recent studies, however, have noted the potential for phylogenetic discordance between gene trees and underlying species trees (e.g. due to stochastic lineage sorting, introgression, or selection). Here we employ a variety of nuclear DNA loci to reassess evolutionary relationships within a recent freshwater fish radiation to reappraise modes of speciation. New Zealand's freshwater-limited Galaxias vulgaris complex is thought to have evolved from Galaxias brevipinnis, a widespread migratory species that retains a plesiomorphic marine juvenile phase. A well-resolved tree, based on four mtDNA regions, previously suggested that marine migratory ability has been lost on three independent occasions in the evolution of this species flock (assuming that loss of diadromy is irreversible). Here we use pseudogene (galaxiid Numt: 1801 bp), intron (S7: 903 bp) and exon (RAG-1: 1427 bp) markers, together with mtDNA, to re-evaluate this hypothesis of parallel evolution. Interestingly, partitioned Bayesian analysis of concatenated nuclear sequences (3141 bp), and concatenated nuclear and mtDNA (4770 bp), both recover phylogenies implying a single loss of diadromy, not three parallel losses as previously inferred from mtDNA alone. This phylogenetic result is reinforced by a multilocus Bayesian analysis (BEST) that estimates the posterior distribution of species trees under a coalescent model. We discuss factors that might explain the apparently misleading phylogenetic inferences generated by mtDNA.
S2488	G. Salvo;S. Y. W. Ho;G. Rosenbaum;R. Ree;E. Conti	2010	Tracing the Temporal and Spatial Origins of Island Endemics in the Mediterranean Region: A Case Study from the Citrus Family (Ruta L., Rutaceae)	Systematic Biology	59	6	705-722	10.1093/sysbio/syq046			Understanding the origin of island endemics is a central task of historical biogeography. Recent methodological advances provide a rigorous framework to determine the relative contribution of different biogeographic processes (e.g., vicariance, land migration, long distance dispersal) to the origin of island endemics. With its complex but well-known history of microplate movements and climatic oscillations, the Mediterranean region (including the Mediterranean basin and Macaronesia) provides the geographic backdrop for the diversification of Ruta L., the type genus of Rutaceae (citrus family). Phylogenetic, molecular dating, and ancestral range reconstruction analyses were carried out to investigate the extent to which past geological connections and climatic history of the Mediterranean region explain the current distribution of species in Ruta, with emphasis on its island endemics. The analyses showed that Ruta invaded the Mediterranean region from the North well before the onset of the Mediterranean climate, and diversified in situ as the climate became Mediterranean. The continental fragment island endemics of the genus originated via processes of land migration/vicariance driven by connections/disconnections between microplates, whereas the oceanic island endemics were the product of a single colonization event from the mainland followed by in situ diversification. This study emphasizes the need for an integrative, hypothesis-based approach to historical biogeography and stresses the importance of temporary land connections and colonization opportunity in the biotic assembly of continental fragment and oceanic islands, respectively.
S2x2x96c15c46c42	R. K. Jansen	1981	Systematics of Spilanthes (Compositae: Heliantheae)	Systematic Botany	6		231-257				Spilanthes is widespread throughout the New and Old World tropics. Morphological and chromosomal evidence supports separation of the genus into two genera, Spilanthes and Acmella, which can be distinguished by at least eight morphological characters and by distinctive basic chromosome numbers. Studies of other genera within the Heliantheae suggest that both Spilanthes and Acmella are allied to Salmea in the Verbesininae. Spilanthes is here recognized as comprising six species distributed primarily in sandy soils of South America, the West Indies, northern Australia, Malaysia, and central and western Africa. A phylogenetic reconstruction employing cladistic methods suggests that the New World species, S. leiocarpa, S. nervosa, S. paraguayensis, and S. urens, are more closely allied to each other than to the Old World species. The cladistic analysis further suggests a closer relationship between the Australo-Malaysian S. anactina and the New World species than with S. costata, a species restricted to central and western tropical Africa.
S292	J. E. Rodman;M. K. Oliver;R. R. Nakamura;J. U. McClammer;A. H. Bledsoe	1984	A taxonomic analysis and revised classification of Centrospermae	Systematic Botany	9		297-323				Clustering and ordination studies demonstrated a phenetically coherent assemblage of 11 core families of Centrospermae, widely separated from Plumbaginaceae and Polygonaceae. Cladistic analyses based on 71 out-group-polarized characters provided strong evidence for monophyly of centrosperms but only weak support for close sister-group status with Plumbaginaceae and Polygonaceae. Both phenetic and cladistic results indicated divergence between Caryophyllaceae, problematically allied with Molluginaceae, and the betalain-producing centrosperms. Three distinct clades emerged among the betalain taxa: a primitive group of Nyctaginaceae + Phytolaccaceae; an intermediate group of Amaranthaceae + Chenopodiaceae; and an advanced group of succulentsóAizoaceae + Cactaceae, Portulacaceae, and Basellaceae + Didiereaceae. We present a revised classification of Centrospermae, emphasizing cladistic relationships of the 11 core families and including several aberrant or little-known genera subordinated and sequenced according to conventions described by Wiley (1981). The new classification is compatible with recent interpretations of floral homologies and with external data from nucleic acid, ultrastructural, and serological comparisons.
S2x4x96c14c11c23	C. S. Campbell	1986	Phylogenetic reconstructions and two new varieties in the Andropogon virginicus complex (Poaceae: Andropogoneae)	Systematic Botany	11		280-292				Phylogenetic reconstructions of the Andropogon virginicus complex were performed using Swofford's computer programs for maximum parsimony. Character state polarity is based on outgroup analysis of Andropogon sect. Leptopogon, to which the virginicus complex belongs. A previously undetected synapomorphy justifies monophyly of this section. The data used in the reconstructions contain extensive homoplasy, and tree topology changes considerably with minor changes in the data. Nevertheless, the interrelationships of the taxa on the most parsimonious trees are largely concordant with the results of previous studies. These cladistic analyses do, however, suggest different evolutionary relationships for the subspecific taxa of A. virginicus and A. glomeratus, the two most complex species. As a consequence of these analyses, two new varieties, A. virginicus var. decipiens and A. glomeratus var. scabriglumus, are described.
S235	J. E. Eckenwalder;S. C. H. Barrett	1986	Phylogenetic systematics of Pontederiaceae	Systematic Botany	11		373-391				Six different methods of cladogram construction were applied to a data set embracing 34 species and subspecies of Pontederiaceae. Nineteen Wagner trees were constructed using different combinations of character subsets and outgroups. Although 12 trees were constructed using the largest character cliques uncovered by character compatibility analysis, these were highly unresolved. Four additional trees were constructed using phenetic methods. Trees resulting from the various procedures were compared using several optimality criteria. Wagner trees based on all 42 characters or on the subset of 27 reproductive characters were most successful according to these criteria. Branch-swapping trials, based upon common features found in the Wagner and other trees produced another 10 trees that were as successful as the Wagner trees. The number of about equally successful trees is partly a function of homoplasy. Two-thirds of the character state changes on the trees are homoplasious. The primitive breeding system of the Pontederiaceae is not clearly resolved, but heterostyly is probably a synapomorphy of only one lineage of the family. A vicariance explanation of the biogeography of the family, based on a Gondwanan distribution, seems less parsimonious than an origin in South America, followed by several eastward dispersals. While Monochoria and Pontederia are apparently monophyletic under different analyses, Eichhornia and Heteranthera, as presently circumscribed, are probably paraphyletic.
S243	A. J. Gilmartin;G. K. Brown	1987	Bromeliales, related monocots, and resolution of relationships among Bromeliaceae subfamilies	Systematic Botany	12	4	493-500				Cladistics, phenetics, and our understanding of chromosomal evolution were applied to questions of the relationships and resemblances among the three subfamilies of the monocot family Bromeliaceae. This large, distinct family (2100 species) is mostly from the new world tropics. Among 10 possibly closely related families to the monotypic order Bromeliales, Velloziaceae of Bromeliflorae appear to be the most likely to share the same common ancestor with Bromeliacae, though other members of Bromeliflorae (and some Zingiberiflorae and Commeliniflorae) are also implicated by the analyses. Nearly all of these sister taxa have the same effect in polarizing morphological and anatomical characters. Cladistic analyses placed Bromelioideae and Tillandsioideae as sister taxa and the third subfamily, Pitcairnioideae in close proximity to the family's putative ancestor. A possible explanation of the revealed, multiple lineage relationships and phenetic resemblances among families is a hybrid, paleopolyploid origin of Bromeliaceae. Chromosome numbers are in accord with this notion of reticulate evolution having occurred during the origin of the monotypic order, Bromeliales.
S255	A. W. Meerow	1987	A monograph of Eucrosia (Amaryllidaceae)	Systematic Botany	12		460-492				Eucrosia is a small, rare, polymorphic, central Andean genus of petiolate-leaved Amaryllidaceae. Seven species and two varieties are recognized. Three species are endemic to Ecuador and two to Peru; two additional, largely Ecuadorean, species are occasional in Peru. Eucrosia is primarily a xeric, lowland, floristic element, inhabiting seasonally dry vegetation of the lower, western slopes and Pacific coastal lowlands, with a single species adapted to montane rainforest understory. The genus is marked by its petiolate leaves with wide laminae; weakly to strongly zygomorphic flowers; long, declinate stamens in all but one species; and the presence of androecial nectar glands in five of the species. Pollen exine morphology exhibits a phylogenetically significant transformation series from semi-tectate/reticulate to verrucate/fossulate. The most common somatic chromosome number is 2n = 46. The flowers are putatively adapted for butterfly pollination, but a single report of hummingbird visitation is recorded for E. eucrosioides. Phylogenetic analysis places E. stricklandii as the most primitive species in the genus. Phaedranassa and Rauhia are the genera closest to Eucrosia, and it is hypothesized that Stenomesson is ancestral to these three.
S2x3x96c13c26c26	C. W. Park	1987	Flavonoid chemistry of Polygonum sect. Echinocaulon: A systematic study	Systematic Botany	12		167-179				Thirteen species of Polygonum sect. Echinocaulon were examined for leaf flavonoid constituents. Thirty-six flavonoid compounds were isolated and identified, most of which were glycosylated and/or methoxylated derivatives of the flavonols kaempferol, quercetin, and myricetin, and of the flavones apigenin and luteolin. Among them, quercetin 3-O-glycosides were major flavonoid constituents, and present in all species. Species of section Echinocaulon exhibit relatively complex patterns of leaf flavonoid constituents. Although the flavonoid data for some species are lacking, those available appear to be very useful for species delimitation and for recognizing species relationships in the section. Most species of section Echinocaulon are readily distinguished by their flavonoid profiles, and the cladogram based on nine flavonoid characters suggests four basic chemical lineages in the section.
S256	J. M. Miller	1988	Floral pigments and phylogeny in Echinocereus (Cactaceae)	Systematic Botany	13		173-183				A phylogenetic hypothesis is presented based upon floral flavonoid glycoside characters from 87 geographically separated populations representing 14 species of Echinocereus including E. chloranthus, E. engelmannii, E. enneacanthus, E. fendleri, E. pectinatus, E. polyacanthus, E. reichenbachii, E. rigidissimus, E. scopulorum, E. stoloniferus, E. stramineus, E. subinermis, E. triglochidiatus, and E. viridiflorus. A biosynthetic scheme involving flavanone-, dihydroflavonol-, flavone-, and flavonol-7-O-glycosides is put forth to clarify critical assumptions of character polarity. The unifying model proposes that intensification of ultraviolet solar radiation accompanied climatic change and increasing aridity of post-pluvial natural habitats. It is assumed that climatic change was the driving force behind the modification of floral flavonoids which act in cactus flowers as possible ultraviolet screens. Taxa which share the derived micromolecular chemosyndrome (presence of flavanone- and dihydroflavonol-7-O-glycosides) are considered more advanced than those species with 3-O-mono- and diglycosides of the common flavonols, because these flavonoids presumably better shield the cactus flowers from potentially damaging radiation in the UV-B. Flavone- and flavonol-7-O-glycosides are also considered to be apomorphic since they are immediate biosynthetic derivations of the UV-B flavonoid screening agents. Camin-Sokal Parsimony with known ancestral states (determined from the unifying model) allowed the construction of hypothetical phylogenies for 14 species.
S2x3x96c17c52c22	G. S. Varadarajan;A. J. Gilmartin	1988	Phylogenetic relationships of groups of genera within the subfamily Pitcairnioideae (Bromeliaceae)	Systematic Botany	13		283-293				The phylogenetic relationships among the sixteen genera of the subfamily Pitcairnioideae are resolved with the aid of cladistic methods. Two genera of Velloziaceae (Barbacenia, Vellozia) and three each from the bromeliad subfamilies Tillandsioideae (Glomeropitcairnia, Guzmania, Vriesea) and Bromelioideae (Hohenbergia, Neoregelia, and Orthophytum) were used individually to determine the polarity of the characters of Pitcairnioideae. The most parsimonious phylogenetic reconstruction suggests three monophyletic lineages within the subfamily. Brocchinia represents its own, perhaps ancient lineage; Ayensua, Connellia, Cottendorfia, Fosterella, Navia, Pepinia, Pitcairnia, and Steyerbromelia constitute the second monophyletic group; and Abromeitiella, Brewcaria, Deuterocohnia, Dyckia, Encholirium, Hechtia, and Puya the third. Together with the present day geographic distributions of taxa and the past environmental changes in the Neotropics, this study concludes that the subfamily has radiated from the Guayana Highlands to several geographical areas.
S1x29x96c16c51c12	A. J. Gilmartin;G. K. Brown;G. S. Varadarajan;M. Neighbours	1989	Status of Glomeropitcairnia within evolutionary history of Bromeliaceae	Systematic Botany	14		339-348				The genus Glomeropitcairnia has long been poorly understood. It has been placed variously within the bromeliad subfamily Tillandsioideae along with five other recognized tillandsioid genera (Catopsis, Guzmania, Mezobromelia, Tillandsia, and Vriesea); in its own tribe of the tillandsioid subfamily; and, alternatively, has been considered to be a subgenus within Pitcairnia (subfamily Pitcairnioideae). New data on chromosomes and stigma architecture provide, respectively, plesiomorphies and autapomorphies relative to the family's sister taxon. All available data including morphology and anatomy, as well as the cladistic analysis, support retention of Glomeropitcairnia within subfamily Tillandsioideae and suggest that the genus is sister taxon to the most recent common ancestor of the tillandsioid genera, Guzmania and Mezobromelia.
S1x31x96c12c25c09	R. B. Huck;W. S. Judd;W. M. Whitten;J. D. Skean;R. P. Wunderlin;K. R. Delaney	1989	A new Dicerandra (Labiatae) from the Lake Wales ridge of Florida, with a cladistic analysis and discussion of endemism	Systematic Botany	14		197-213				Dicerandra christmanii, differing from D. frutescens in anther and corolla color, essential oils, average leaf length, and anther connective glandularity, is described from sclerophyllous oak-sand pine scrub on yellow, well drained sandy soils near Sebring, in Highlands County, Florida. Its distinctness and phylogenetic placement are substantiated by phenetic analysis of morphological features, field study of variability in natural populations, survey of leaf essential oils, SEM study of anther micromorphology, preliminary investigation of pollination biology, garden observations, and a revised cladistic analysis of the genus. The discovery of D. christmanii is indicative of the need for additional taxonomic studies involving the highly endemic flora of the Lake Wales Ridge, a region of extensive and continuing habitat destruction due to agricultural and urban development.
S11x5x95c16c41c53	H. Loconte;J. R. Estes	1989	Phylogenetic systematics of Berberidaceae and Ranunculales (Magnoliidae)	Systematic Botany	14		565-579				Based on a cladistic study employing outgroup comparison and parsimony analysis of 34 genera within Ranunculales, we infer that Berberidaceae, Lardizabalaceae, Menispermaceae, and Ranunculaceae are monophyletic groups. Berberidaceae and Lardizabalaceae are sister groups with the synapomorphies of compound leaves and flowers with a biseriate androecium. The sister group of (Berberidaceae-Lardizabalaceae) remains unresolved, as we find equally parsimonious positions for Menispermaceae and Ranunculaceae. Earlier proposals to associate Berberidaceae with Ranunculaceae, and Lardizabalaceae with Menispermaceae appear to be based on plesiomorphies and convergence. The subordinated hierarchy for Lardizabalaceae is summarized as: (Decaisneoideae-(Sinofranchetieae-Lardizabaleae)), with Decaisneoideae and Sinofranchetieae recognized as a new subfamily and tribe, respectively. Sargentodoxa is the sister taxon of Boquila within Lardizabaleae. The classification for Berberidaceae is summarized as: (Nandinoideae-(Leonticeae-(Berberidinae-Epimediinae))). The subtribe Epimediinae, characterized by striate pollen exine and a chromosome base number of x = 6, comprises the Epimedium group, the Podophyllum group, and Bongardia. The resemblance of Bongardia and Leontice is the result of convergent evolution.
S271	R. Olmstead	1989	Phylogeny, phenotypic evolution, and biogeography of the Scutellaria angustifolia Complex (Lamiaceae): Inference from morphological and molecular data	Systematic Botany	14		320-338				Independent analyses of phylogenetic relationships in the Scutellaria angustifolia complex were carried out using both molecular and morphological data. A best estimate of the phylogenetic relationships among the 10 taxa of the S. angustifolia complex is derived from a synthesis of the molecular and morphological analyses. This approach provides greater resolution than the congruence approach and retains the interpretative value of using two independent data sets, which would be lost if the data were combined. The phylogeny based on morphology is both less well resolved than, and not congruent with, the phylogeny based on molecular data. However, morphology provides important clues to help resolve one portion of the phylogeny that is poorly resolved using the molecular data. The best estimate of phylogeny for the group is then used to interpret the evolution of vegetative and reproductive characters, habitat preference, and biogeography. The results suggest that long-flowered, outcrossing species have evolved in parallel on three separate occasions from short-flowered, more highly selfing species, a trend that is atypical in flowering plants. Three taxa are identified as having morphologies that are apparently ancestral to other taxa, thereby furnishing an example of morphological stasis without evidence from the fossil record. The evolution of habitat preference generally has been from wet to dry sites and the biogeographic history of the group is one of eastward dispersal accompanied by speciation from an origin in California.
S11x4x95c20c37c39	T. J. Ayers	1990	Systematics of Heterotoma (Campanulaceae) and the evolution of nectar spurs in the New World Lobelioideae	Systematic Botany	15		296-327				Historically, the genus Heterotoma has been delimited from the large, cosmopolitan genus Lobelia by a single character, the presence of a nectar spur. Comparative studies between Heterotoma and selected members of Lobelia utilizing macro- and micromorphology of pollen and seed testa, anatomy, and field studies support a hypothesis of three independent derivations of nectar spurs in two sections of Lobelia. The present treatment recognizes 12 species (14 taxa). Heterotoma lobelioides, including two varieties, is retained as a monotypic genus. The remaining species are transferred to Lobelia sect. Hemipogon. The revision includes keys, descriptions, distribution maps, and illustrations (or references to such) for each species. One new variety (H. lobelioides var. glabra) is described, four new combinations are made (L. aurita, L. endlichii, L. flexuosa var. intermedia, and L. goldmannii), and one new name is proposed (L. volcanica).
S11x4x95c21c11c15	B. L. Carr;J. V. Crisci;P. C. Hoch	1990	A cladistic analysis of the genus Gaura (Onagraceae)	Systematic Botany	15		454-461				Gaura, a genus of 21 species in North America, forms a monophyletic group within tribe Onagreae. Compared to the outgroup (Calylophus), it is clearly defined by three synapomorphies: indehiscent fruits, four-lobed stigmas, and fruits with fewer than 10 seeds. A cladistic analysis of the genus was performed using 20 characters from floral morphology, fruit morphology, and plant habit and growth characteristics. Polarity of the characters was based on the outgroup comparison method. Two most parsimonious cladograms, with only a single minor topological difference, were generated, with 29 steps and a consistency index of 0.72. A Nelson consensus tree was constructed, which has the same length as the two cladograms, and an identical topology to one of them. The consensus cladogram defines 12 monophyletic groups. This cladogram supports most of the current infrageneric classification of Gaura, except that sects. Xerogaura and Gaura appear to be paraphyletic groups. The placement of G. lindheimeri within sect. Gaura in keeping with the current classification depends on interpreting two habit characters in this species as being secondarily derived.
S1x29x96c15c05c02	P. B. Cox;L. E. Urbatsch	1990	A phylogenetic analysis of the coneflower genera (Asteraceae: Heliantheae)	Systematic Botany	15		394-402				The coneflowers include the genera Dracopis, Echinacea, Ratibida, and Rudbeckia, with Rudbeckia being divided into sects. Rudbeckia, Macrocline and Laciniata. As part of a monographic study of Rudbeckia sects. Macrocline and Laciniata, relationships to other nearby Heliantheae needed to be assessed. Stuessy grouped the four coneflower genera together within the subtribe Helianthinae. Later, Robinson erected the subtribe Rudbeckiinae to include Dracopis, Ratibida, and Rudbeckia. He removed Echinacea to the subtribe Ecliptinae on the bases of chromosome number and anatomical features and suggested a probable relationship to the genera Balsamorhiza, Helianthella, and Wyethia. In the current work, twenty-eight qualitative characters were chosen for cladistic analysis performed by the Branch and Bound algorithm in PAUP, which guarantees discovery of the most parsimonious tree. This analysis supports the historical placement of Echinacea with the coneflowers. The resulting cladogram presents the Rudbeckiinae as a monophyletic taxon with the genera of the Ecliptinae forming a group distinct from the coneflowers. The clade of the sister taxa, Dracopis and Ratibida, is related to a clade containing two distinct groups, one of Echinacea and Rudbeckia sect. Macrocline and the other of Rudbeckia sect. Rudbeckia and sect. Laciniata.
S1x29x96c17c14c45	P. Goldblatt;P. Rudall;J. E. Henrich	1990	The genera of the Sisyrinchium Alliance (Iridaceae: Iridoideae): Phylogeny and relationships	Systematic Botany	15		497-510				A phylogenetic analysis of the New World members of Sisyrinchieae, most primitive of the four tribes of Iridaceae subfamily Iridoideae, using leaf anatomical and chromosomal data in conjunction with traditional morphological criteria suggests substantial realignments in the current taxonomy. The New World Sisyrinchieae constitute the majority of the taxa in the tribe; the remaining Bobartia and Diplarrhena, African and Australian, are not considered in the study. Phaiophleps, Chamelum, and Ona appear to be more closely related to Sisyrinchium sect. Eriphilema than the last does to sects. Sisyrinchium and Echthronema, although all these taxa appear to comprise a monophyletic assemblage based on the characters used in our study. Solenomelus, Tapeinia, and Orthrosanthus are more distantly related to Sisyrinchium and its satellite taxa, but the three genera share some features with the Sisyrinchium clade. We treat sects. Sisyrinchium and Echthronema as subgenera of Sisyrinchium and unite sect. Eriphilema and the genera Phaiophleps, Chamelum, and Ona in a single genus, Olsynium (1837). Appropriate changes to the taxonomy of Sisyrinchium are presented and necessary new combinations in Olsynium are made: O. acaulis, O. biflorum, O. lyckholmi, O. bodenbenderi, O. frigidum, O. luteum, O. filifolium, O. junceum, O. philippii, O. scirpoideum, and 0. obscura. Additional anatomical observations are presented for Tapeinia, Ona, and Sisyrinchium spicatum, which complement extensive anatomical observations already published.
S2x2x96c16c47c06	K. A. Kron;W. S. Judd	1990	Phylogenetic relationships within the Rhodoreae (Ericaceae) with specific comments on the placement of Ledum	Systematic Botany	15		57-68				The cladistic relationships of the tribe Rhodoreae (Ericaceae; Rhododendroideae) are investigated. The tribe is likely monophyletic, and may be diagnosed by the perulae found with the inflorescence. The genus Rhododendron, as currently recognized, is shown to be paraphyletic. However, if Ledum is included (as a subsection of sect. Rhododendron, within subg. Rhododendron), and Therorhodion is excluded, then the genus is probably monophyletic. Ledum likely is related most closely to Rhododendron subsect. Edgeworthia. The cladistic relationships within Rhododendron are consistent with the recognition of eight subgenera: Anthodendron, Azaleastrum, Candidastrum, Choniastrum, Hymenanthes, Mumeazalea, Rhododendron, and Tsutsusi. The monophyly of Copeland's segregate genera is thus, in large part, supported, although these groups are placed here at subgeneric rank. Among these subgenera, Anthodendron is possibly cladistically basal. This subgenus and the phenetically similar subgenera Tsutsusi, Azaleastrum, Choniastrum, Candidastrum, and Mumeazalea have been recognized traditionally as the azalea complex or chorus subgenerum Nomazalea, but this group is paraphyletic and should not be given formal taxonomic recognition. The circumscription and phylogenetic relationships of some subgenera, e.g., Azaleastrum (as broadly defined, i.e., including Choniastrum, Mumeazalea, and Canadidastrum) need further study. Menziesia and Tsusiophyllum are recognizable at the generic level, and may be related due to the shared possession of slit-like anther dehiscence. Thus, the pattern of character variation within the tribe may be expressed by the recognition of four genera: Therorhodion, Menziesia, Tsusiophyllum, and Rhododendron. The following new combinations are made: Rhododendron subsect. Ledum, R. palustre, R. groenlandicum.
S2x3x96c12c15c02	L. P. Kvist	1990	Revision of Heppiella (Gesneriaceae)	Systematic Botany	15		720-735				Four species are recognized in the Andean genus Heppiella: H. ulmifolia that ranges from Colombia to Peru, H. viscida from northwestern Venezuela, H. verticillata from the Eastern Cordillera of Ecuador and adjacent Colombia, and H. repens from Ecuador and southern Colombia. The former three species have allopatric distributions, occur in disturbed habitats, and are terrestrial. Heppiella repens is sympatric with H. ulmifolia and H. verticillata, occurs in mist forests, and is usually climbing and epiphytic. Heppiella has apparently developed from ancestors close to Gloxinia, and this latter genus was used as an outgroup in a cladistic analysis. The only derived features that the widespread and variable H. ulmifolia possesses are those that distinguish Heppiella from Gloxinia. The three more restricted species have no derived features in common, and have apparently evolved independently from geographically isolated populations of H. ulmifolia.
S11x5x95c16c31c52	M. Lavin	1990	The genus Sphinctospermum (Leguminosae): taxonomy and tribal relationships as inferred from a cladistic analysis of traditional data	Systematic Botany	15		544-559				The systematic position of the monotypic genus Sphinctospermum has been confused, being placed in either of two tribes, Robinieae or Millettieae, of the Leguminosae subfam. Papilionoideae. Originally allied with Tephrosia (Millettieae), subsequent studies revealed that Sphinctospermum has a base chromosome number of x = 8 and seeds that accumulate the non-protein amino acid canavanine. Such evidence was used to support its inclusion in Robinieae. A cladistic analysis of primarily morphological data is presented that incorporates new or newly interpreted characters, including anatomical and developmental features. These data do not support a sister group relationship of Sphinctospermum and Coursetia, as previously proposed by some workers. Furthermore, the results of this analysis of traditional data are equivocal and suggest that the probable affinities of Sphinctospermum are just as likely to be with genera of Millettieae than with those of Robinieae.
S11x5x95c17c11c15	B. D. Mishler	1990	Reproductive biology and species distinctions in the moss genus Tortula, as represented in Mexico	Systematic Botany	15		86-97				The prevailing biological species concept, which gives primacy to the role of interbreeding in causing the coherence of distinct species, predicts that species in asexual groups should be less discrete than those in sexual groups. Under this view, sexual groups should be more variable than asexual groups within populations (because of recombination), but less variable among populations (because of gene flow). This prediction is tested using 23 sympatric species in the moss genus Tortula in Mexico. Reproduction in this group ranges from frequently sexual to completely asexual, as measured by frequency of sporophyte production. Species distinctness is compared using two approaches. In the first, distinctness is measured cladistically as the number of autapomorphies present. In the second, distinctness is measured phenetically through morphometric studies. The result is the same under either approach: there is no particular correlation between mode of reproduction and species distinctness. It is concluded that processes other than interbreeding may be responsible for species formation and maintenance even in sexual groups.
S303	Y. Suh;B. B. Simpson	1990	Phylogenetic analysis of chloroplast DNA in North American Gutierrezia and related genera (Asteraceae: Astereae)	Systematic Botany	15		660-670				Restriction site mutations analysis using 18 restriction endonucleases for chloroplast DNA's from North American Gutierrezia has led to a generic circumscription which is somewhat different from those previously proposed. Molecular data agree with a recent taxonomic treatment of Lane (1982, 1985), which transferred the x = 4 species from Xanthocephalum and submerged Greenella into Gutierrezia, but they do not support the submersion of the monotypic genus Thurovia. Thurovia is closely related as a sister group to Amphiachyris and should be resegregated from Gutierrezia. The study indicated that Xanthocephalum with x = 6 is very distantly related to Gutierrezia, even though Xanthocephalum has often been treated as part of the Xanthocephalum-Gutierrezia complex. Xanthocephalum is, in contrast, very closely related to Grindelia, which also has a base chromosome number of x = 6. Traditional species of Gutierrezia, G. californica, G. grandis, G. microcephala, G. sarothrae, G. serotina, and G. texana, constitute a closely related cluster and are well-separated from other purported members of the genus. Gutierrezia californica s. str. and G. bracteata should be separated again as distinct species. The herbaceous species, G. sericocarpa and G. sphaerocephala, appear to be the most primitive in the genus.
S11x5x95c10c49c21	R. W. Cruden	1991	A revision of Isidrogalvia (Liliaceae): Recognition for Ruiz and Pavon's Genus	Systematic Botany	16		270-282				Isidrogalvia, which has been included in Tofieldia s.l. since 1805, is indigenous to South America. Cladistic analyses suggest that its closest relatives are Pleea and Harperocallis rather than Tofieldia s. str. or Triantha. Isidrogalvia differs substantively from its Northern Hemisphere relatives in having styles that are united to their apices or nearly so, tomentose leaf margins, and a seed appendage that is decurrent along the seed body. In addition, it differs from Tofieldia and Triantha in having scapes that bear many bracts, most of which are above the middle, racemes of erect flowers that are Subtended by a calyculus of free bracts, and large, multi-veined tepals that are longer than the stamens and enclose the capsules. The five species of Isidrogalvia fall into three groups, which are readily separated using capsule and bract characters: 1. falcata has 3-ribbed capsules and calycular bracts that are longer than wide; I. sessiliflora (comb. nov.) and I. robustior (comb. nov.) have incompletely 9-ribbed capsules and calycular bracts that are longer than wide; and I. schomburgkiana (comb. nov.) and I. duidae (comb. nov.) have 9-ribbed capsules and calycular bracts that are wider than long.
S2x5x96c18c18c49	S. B. Hoot	1991	Phylogeny of the Ranunculaceae based on epidermal microcharacters and macromorphology	Systematic Botany	16		741-755				The epidermal microcharacters of 20 genera in the Ranunculaceae and 10 outgroup genera from the families Glaucidiaceae, Circaeasteraceae, Berberidaceae, Menispermaceae, and Lardizabalaceae were studied employing scanning electron and light microscopy. Characters such as type of trichome and stomatal length are valuable tools in assessing phylogeny in the Ranunculaceae. Using cladistic analyses, the basic division of the family into two major groups according to chromosome size (R- and T-types) was confirmed. By outgroup polarization, the T-type chromosome group is considered most primitive. Two major clades are recognized in the T-type taxa: the Aquilegia and Thalictrum group including closely related genera and a group consisting of Coptis and Xanthorhka. Hydrastis is not considered a member of the Ranunculaceae. Further cladistic analyses of the R-type taxa using macrocharacters derived mainly from floral and fruit morphology resulted in the following subdivisions: the Anemone and Ranunculus group including Pulsatilla, Hepatica, and Clematis; the Cimicifuga and Actaea group; and the Helleborus group including Eranthis, Trollius, and Caltha.
S11x6x95c08c52c19	M. Lavin;J. J. Doyle	1991	Tribal relationships of Sphinctospermum (Leguminosae): Integration of traditional and chloroplast DNA data	Systematic Botany	16		162-172				By using both consensus and combination approaches, new chloroplast DNA data are integrated into a primarily morphological data set that bears on the tribal affinities of Sphinctospermum. Both approaches are useful in testing hypotheses of homology among traditional characters but the combination approach is more useful than the consensus approach in testing hypotheses of reticulate evolution. This is because discrete chloroplast DNA markers can be tracked on the topology of alternative cladograms. Such discrete DNA markers are derived from a chloroplast DNA phylogeny using the bootstrap resampling procedure; a chloroplast DNA lineage with a 95100% confidence level is scored as a discrete character in an integrated data set. The results suggest that Sphinctospermum is related to genera of Robinieae by common descent and that introgressive hybridization has not been involved in the evolution of this morphologically distinctive genus.
S11x5x95c18c41c13	J. L. Luteyn	1991	A synopsis of the genus Didonica (Ericaceae: Vaccinieae) with two new species	Systematic Botany	16		587-597				A synopsis of Didonica, a genus of neotropical Ericaceae endemic to Panama and Costa Rica, is presented. Didonica crassiflora and D. Subsessilis are described as new, joining the previously described D. pendula and D. panamensis. Taxonomic history, general morphology, generic and specific relationships, and a cladistic analysis are provided. The two new species are illustrated, and a key to the four known species is given.
S11x6x95c09c15c52	C. T. Philbrick;R. K. Jansen	1991	Phylogenetic studies of North American Callitriche (Callitrichaceae) using chloroplast DNA restriction fragment analysis	Systematic Botany	16		478-491				Phylogenetic study in the Callitrichaceae is hampered by reduced floral structure and environmentally mediated phenotypic variation of both vegetative and reproductive (fruit) characters. Yet a phylogenetic perspective is requisite to an understanding of ecological, morphological, and reproductive system evolution in the family. Cladistic analysis of chloroplast DNA (cpDNA) restriction fragment variation, combined with several morphological characters, was conducted on 11 taxa of Callitriche (nine indigenous to North America and two European). These studies provide the first explicit phylogenetic hypotheses for the Callitrichaceae and support the monophyly of several groups. Callitriche hermaphroditica, the single obligately submerged species examined, aligned basal to all other North American taxa. The remaining indigenous North American taxa formed two opposing clades: 1) the terrestrial C. nuttallii, C. peploides, C. terrestris grouped with the amphibious C. marginata, and 2) the amphibious C. heterophylla var. heterophylla and var. bolanderi, C. trochlearis, and C. verna. Relationships among the taxa within these clades are unresolved. These analyses indicate that the internal geitonogamous breeding system i8 synapomorphic for the latter clade, and suggest that the terrestrial growth habit may be derived from the amphibious growth habit in the family. This study demonstrates the utility of using cpDNA restriction fragment variation to gain phylogenetic perspectives in aquatic angiosperms.
S11x5x95c17c54c24	J. E. Rodman	1991	A taxonomic analysis of glucosinolate-producing plants, Part 2: Cladistics	Systematic Botany	16		619-629				A dataset of 90 putatively homologous characters was assembled to analyze phylogenetic relationships among the 15 taxa of glucosinolate-producing plants and 11 potential outgroups. The characters sample a broad range of anatomical, morphological, physiological, and phytochemical aspects of these plants. With or without glucosinolate characters included in the cladistic analysis, a lineage emerges consisting of core Capparales (Brassicaceae, Capparaceae, and Resedaceae) allied with Gyrostemonaceae and Tovariaceae and affiliated with Bataceae, Salvadoraceae, and the non-glucosinolate Koeberlinia. This clade is marked by vestured pitting, curved embryo in seed, vacuolar or utricular cisternae of the endoplasmic reticulum, myrosin cells, and a fundamentally tetramerous floral construction. Drypetes affiliates with Euphorbiaceae, and Limnanthaceae with Balsaminaceae, affirming the convergent nature of glucosinolate biosynthesis. Caricaceae, Moringaceae, and Tropaeolaceae remain problematic as do the poorly known genera Akania, Bretschneidera, and Pentadiplandra. Earlier serological comparisons corroborate some of these alignments, including displacement of Moringaceae from core Capparales.
S11x6x95c09c36c37	K. J. Systma;J. F. Smith;P. E. Berry	1991	The use of chloroplast DNA to assess biogeography and evolution of morphology, breeding systems, and flavonoids in Fuschia sect. Skinnera (Onagraceae)	Systematic Botany	16		257-269				Fuchsia sect. Skinnera, the only Old World group in the genus, comprises three species in New Zealand and one in Tahiti. These species include a tree, a large shrub, a climbing-scandent shrub, and a creeping, barely woody plant. The section is extremely distinct from the New World species of Fuchsia, and several sharply contrasting models depicting the evolutionary history of these species and the character state changes associated with habit, breeding systems, and chemistry have been proposed. A chloroplast DNA restriction site analysis of sect Skinnera and two outgroup sections was performed, generating a single tree depicting maternal relationships. This tree is congruent with one previously proposed model and demonstrates that the rare F. procumbens of New Zealand is the sister group to all other species in the section, while F. cyrtandroides of Tahiti is the sister taxon of the two remaining New Zealand species. Based on the chloroplast DNA analysis, a critical reevaluation was made of character state changes in the section relating to morphology, breeding systems, and flavonoid compounds.
S2x4x96c13c29c41	D. Wilken;R. L. Hartman	1991	A revision of the Ipomopsis spicata complex (Polemoniaceae)	Systematic Botany	16		143-161				A cladistic analysis indicates that the Ipomopsis spicata complex is monophyletic, related as a sister group to I. congesta in sect. Microgilia, and is characterized by regional differentiation most likely associated with climatic and topographic changes that occurred during the late Pliocene and Pleistocene. The cladogram provides evidence for the independent evolution of alpine, sub-alpine, and lowland races in the Rocky Mountains and the eastern perimeter of the Great Basin, correlated with a progressive change in inflorescence architecture, trichome distribution, and floral morphology. Based on morphological studies and examination of all type specimens, a taxonomic revision is proposed that summarizes morphological, geographical, and cladistic patterns within the complex. We recognize 1. spicata as composed of five principal geographic races treated as: subsp. spicata, subsp. capitata, subsp. orchidacea (comb. nov.), subsp. robruthii (subsp. nov.), and subsp. tridactyla (comb. nov.). Subspecies orchidacea includes var. orchidacea and var. cephaloidea (comb. nov.), which differ in ecological distribution and inflorescence architecture but intergrade in parts of their sympatry. Subspecies robruthii is described from the Absaroka Range of northwestern Wyoming.
S11x5x95c20c42c46	A. Bruneau;J. J. Doyle	1993	Cladistic analysis of chloroplast DNA restriction site characters in Erythrina (Leguminosae: Phaseoleae)	Systematic Botany	18		229-247				Chloroplast DNA restriction site variation was examined in 60 species of Erythrina (Leguminosae: Phaseoleae). This sample represents four of the five subgenera and most sections of this pantropical, woody, and ornithophilous genus of 112 species. Cladistic analysis of restriction site characters resulted in numerous most parsimonious trees, but the strict consensus tree was highly resolved. Low levels of resolution because of absence of characters were confined to a single clade representing plastomes sampled from a large group of closely related species. The groupings obtained from the chloroplast DNA characters were generally consistent with the traditional in- frageneric classification scheme for the genus. Plastome lineages of only one of the four subgenera surveyed was monophyletic, but those of most sections or of groups of closely related sections were monophyletic. The gene tree suggests that members of the African subg. Chirocalyx and of the Paleotropical subg. Erythraster are closely related and sister to African and Asian members of subg. Erythrina. Chloroplast DNA relationships indicate that hummingbird pollination, considered derived relative to passerine pollination, evolved convergently in at least three distinct lineages and that reversals to passerine pollination also may have occurred.
S11x5x95c19c48c11	C. J. Bult;E. A. Zimmer	1993	Nuclear ribosomal RNA sequences for inferring tribal relationships within Onagraceae	Systematic Botany	18		48-63				Relationships among tribes within the evening-primrose family, Onagraceae, were inferred from 18S and 26S ribosomal RNA sequences. Of 1819 nucleotide positions sequenced, 17 were phylogenetically informative. With Lythrum (Lythraceae) as the outgroup, one most parsimonious cladogram was derived (length - 28; consistency index - 0.75) using computer-assisted phylogeny inference software. The cladogram supported Ludwigia as the sister group to Onagraceae and provided strong evidence for the monophyly of Oenothera-Epilobium and Circaea-Fuchsia. The placements of Hauya and Lopezia were not well supported by the data as indicated by examining trees which were one step longer than the most parsimonious tree.
S11x6x95c08c35c24	J. J. Doyle;J. L. Doyle	1993	Chloroplast DNA phylogeny of the papilionoid legume tribe Phaseoleae	Systematic Botany	18		309-327				Restriction map variation has been assayed in the slowly evolving chloroplast DNA (cpDNA) inverted repeat regions of 43 genera of the large and economically important legume tribe Phaseoleae and representatives of several allied tribes. Cladistic analyses of these data indicate that several plastome groups correspond well to subtribes recognized largely on the basis of morphological variation. Based on these cpDNA data, the tribe as a whole does not appear to be monophyletic, a result in accordance with current, morphologically-based hypotheses. Plastomes of several genera belonging to subtribes considered basal within Phaseoleae have as their sister groups plastomes of non-Phaseoleae tribes, notably Millettieae, the tribe considered to represent the ancestral stock from which diverse elements of Phaseoleae were derived. More unexpectedly, plastomes of the tribe Desmodieae fall within the clade that includes the most derived chloroplast genomes of Phaseoleae.
S3x30x98c12c23c35	D. S. Hibbett;R. Vilgalys	1993	Phylogenetic relationships of Lentinus (Basidiomycotina) inferred from molecular and morphological characters	Systematic Botany	18	3	409-433				Phylogenetic relationships of the basidiomycete Lentinus were investigated using 20 morphological and 133 nucleic acid sequence characters from three regions in the 5' half of the nuclear-encoded large subunit rRNA. Molecular data were obtained from 34 individuals that represent 11 species in Lentinus, nine in the Polyporaceae, eight in the Tricholomataceae, and one in the Corticiaceae. Thanetephorus cucumeris (Tulasnellales) was used as an outgroup for rooting purposes. Most of the sequence variation was in regions that correspond to eukaryote-specific divergent domains D1 and D2. Molecular data alone yielded a well-resolved cladogram but morphological data alone were insufficient to resolve phylogenetic relationships. The most resolved cladograms were obtained with a combined analysis of molecular and morphological characters. Bootstrap and decay index measures of branch robustness had a significant positive correlation, but some branches with high bootstrap values were contradicted by near-minimal trees. Monophyly of Lentinus sensu Pegler was not supported. Rather, three monophyletic groups of Lcntinus species were resolved. These largely correspond to Ncolcntinus, Panus, and Lentinus s. str. The latter appears to be derived from the Polyporaceae, suggesting that lamellae are products of convergent evolution.
S11x5x95c15c23c53	P. C. Hoch;J. V. Crisci;H. Tobe;P. E. Berry	1993	A cladistic analysis of the plant family Onagraceae	Systematic Botany	18		31-47				A cladistic analysis of Onagraceae was performed using 17 characters from morphology, anatomy, palynology, embryology, and cytology, with its 16 genera as the terminal taxa, and with several possible outgroups within Myrtales. In the main analysis (all Myrtales as outgroup), seven equally parsimonious cladograms were produced, each with 29 steps and a consistency index of 0.82. A successive weighting procedure was applied, resulting in six cladograms with a consistency index of 0.93. All cladograms share the following nine monophyletic groups: 1) all taxa except Ludwigia; 2) Circaea (Fuchsia-Lopezia); 3) Fuchsia-Lopezia; 4) Gayophytum (Epilobium-Boisduvalia) (Gongylocarpus-Xylonagra-Camissonia(Clarkia(Hauya-Calylophus-Gaura)) (Oenothera-Stenosiphon)); 5) Epilobium-Boisduvalia; 6) Gongylocarpus-Xylonagra-Camissonia(Clarkia(Hauya-Calylophus- Gaura))(Oenothera-Stenosiphon); 7) Clarkia(Hauya-Calylophus-Gaura); 8) Hauya-Calylophus-Gaura; and 9) Oenothera-Stenosiphon. One additional monophyletic group appears after applying the successive weighting procedure: Gayophytum (Epilobium-Boisduvalia). Results of the cladistic analysis support a sister group relationship of Ludwigia to the rest of the genera. The clade of Circaea, Fuchsia, and Lopezia is the sister group of the remaining genera (except Ludwigia), but there is relatively less resolution of the relationships among those genera (the tribes Onagreae, Epilobieae, and Hauyeae). The other main conclusions are that the positions of Hauya and Gayophytum are problematic and not well resolved, and that the tribe Onagreae may be paraphyletic.
S11x6x95c08c58c01	P. S. Manos;K. C. Nixon;J. J. Doyle	1993	Cladistic analysis of restriction site variation within the chloroplast DNA inverted repeat region of selected Hamamelididae	Systematic Botany	18		551-562				A cladistic analysis was conducted on restriction site variation in the inverted repeat region of the chloroplast DNA of 34 taxa, including 22 genera of Hamamelididae, nine genera of Rosidae, and one genus of Magnoliidae (sensu Cronquist). Parsimony analysis of 45 informative characters resulted in four equally parsimonious cladograms. In all trees, Hamamelididae were polyphyletic, with the rosid taxa nested within lower hamamelids and higher hamamelids in turn nested within this rosid group. The higher Hamamelididae (excluding Leitneria but including Betulaceae, Casuarinaceae, Fagaceae, Juglandaceae, Myricaceae, Nothofagaceae) were monophyletic in all of the most-parsimonious trees, and were always a sister group of Malus (Rosaceae). Within the higher hamamelid group, Nothofagus was found to be the sister taxon of the remainder of the taxa, supporting recognition of the family Nothofagaceae. The genera of Fagaceae s. str. formed a monophyletic group and were a sister group of the remainder of the higher hamamelids excluding Nothofagus. The sister group of the rosid-higher hamamelid clade in all trees was a clade that included Liquidambar, Cercidiphyllum, and representative genera of Hamamelidaceae s. str. The analysis showed Euptelea to be the basal taxon of lower hamamelids, whereas Trochodendron was identified as sister taxon to a larger clade comprised of Hamamelidaceae, Cercidiphyllum, rosids, and higher hamamelids. Cercidiphyllllm was shown to be closely related to Hamamelidaceae s.l., whereas Platanus was placed several nodes away from this clade. This analysis supports recent contentions that Hamamelididae sensu Cronquist is not monophyletic. Our results contradict recent suggestions based on fossil leaves that Fagaceae are derived directly from a platanoid ancestor.
S11x6x95c09c02c44	D. R. Morgan	1993	A molecular systematic study and taxonomic revision of Psilactis (Asteraceae: Astereae)	Systematic Botany	18		290-308				Intergeneric and interspecific relationships of Psilactls were studied using data from restriction site analysis of chloroplast DNA and nuclear rDNA. Molecular evidence supports the removal of Psilactis from Machaeranthera and its alliance with Aster. Within the Aster lineage, chloroplast DNA data support an alliance composed of members of Psilactis that have n = 4 (P. tenuis, P. boltoniae) and those of Aster subg. Oxytripolium that are based on x = 5 (A. subulatus, A. tenuifolius), separating them from the n = 9 species of both Aster and Psilactis. Evidence from nuclear rDNA, in contrast, supports different alignments by combining n = 4 and n = 9 species of Psilactis and by allying the n = 5 and n = 10 species of Aster subg. Oxytripolium with other species of Aster. Comparison of cpDNA results with evidence from morphology, rDNA, and isozymes suggests that hybridization may account for some relationships supported by chloroplast DNA. Psilactis is re-established as a distinct genus of six species, with P. mexicana placed in synonymy under P. gentryi. The following new taxonomic combinations are made: Psilactis gentryi, Psilactis odysseus, and Psilactis heterocarpa.
S11x5x95c18c21c47	S. C. Tucker;A. W. Douglas	1993	Utility of ontogenetic and conventional characters in determining phylogenetic relationships of Saururaceae and Piperaceae (Piperales)	Systematic Botany	18		614-641				Morphological and developmental evidence is utilized in a phylogenetic analysis of Piperales. Best resolution of trees was obtained by combining ontogenetic data with conventional morphological data. Floral ontogeny provides a means to determine homology among character states as well as to provide additional characters not observable in mature flowers. Both Lundberg and outgroup rooting were performed using a hypothetical ancestor defined by general ontogenetic states in the former and by five taxa presumably related to the ingroup in the latter. Polarization of character states via ontogenetic generality principles is congruent with outgroup polarization. Saururaceae and Piperaceae are each monophyletic. Saururaceae are supported by three synapomorphies, with Saururus as the basal taxon. The other three saururaceous genera (Anemopsis, Houttuynia, Gymnotheca) share the derived character states of syncarpy, stamen-carpel adnation, and an inferior or half-inferior ovary. Piperaceae are supported by seven synapomorphies with Zippelia as the basal taxon. Six other synapomorphies unite the remaining Piperaceae suggesting that Macropiper and Pothomorphe are specialized offshoots of the morphologically variable Piper. Numerous autapomorphies support Peperomia as a distinct and specialized offshoot within Piperaceae. Within the sister clades Saururaceae and Piperaceae, there are parallel reduction trends in floral organ number and in the sequence of floral organ initiation.
S11x6x95c09c48c59	R. E. Vaillancourt;N. F. Weeden	1993	Chloroplast DNA phylogeny of Old World Vigna (Leguminosae)	Systematic Botany	18		642-651				As presently circumscribed, the genus Vigna contains approximately 150 species distributed in both the New World and Old World. The objective of our work was to test Old World Vigna for monophyly and to study infrageneric relationships. A total of 72 chloroplast DNA mutations was scored among 27 Vigna species, representing six of the seven subgenera and 11 of the 13 Old World sections. Cladistic analysis of these data supports the monophyly of Old World Vigna, the only exception being V. frutescens of subg. Vigna, which fell within the New World Vigna clade. Subgenus Haydonia occupies a basal position in the Old World Vigna clade and is paraphyletic. Subgenus Vigna is polyphyletic. Four Old World cpDNA clades are well resolved: 1) sects. Catiang (the cowpea section) and Reticulatae of subg. Vigna together with subg. Plectotropis; 2) subg. Ceratotropis (the Asian beans); 3) sect. Vigna of subg. Vigna; and 4) sect. Macrodontae of subg. Vigna. The cpDNA phylogeny of Old World Vigna is generally consistent with previous studies. CpDNA results suggest that sects. Catiang and Reticulatae could be split from subg. Vigna and placed with subg. Plectotropis.
S2x4x96c13c41c07	P. G. Wolf;P. S. Soltis;D. E. Soltis	1993	Phylogenetic significance of chloroplast restriction site variation in the Ipomopsis aggregata complex and related species (Polemoniaceae)	Systematic Botany	18		652-662				The Ipomopsis aggregata complex comprises diploid, perennial, montane herbs, distributed across western North America. We used chloroplast DNA (cpDNA) restriction site variation to examine phylogenetic relationships among the three species in the complex, I. aggregata, I. arizonica and I. tenuituba, and several related species. Twenty-one restriction site mutations and four length mutations were used to reconstruct a phylogenetic tree by cladistic methods. With a few exceptions, patterns of cpDNA variation within I. aggregata were consistent with current taxonomy and reflected the geographic distributions of subspecies and populations. However, cpDNA-based relationships among species were not congruent with a pre-I992 taxonomy of the group. Ipomopsis tenuituba did not form a distinct clade; two populations of this species had the same primitive cpDNA as l. arizonica and I. rubra, whereas two other populations emerged on branches within I. aggregata, and one population (of I. tenuituba subsp. macrosiphon) shared mutations with I. thurberi. It is not clear whether this pattern is the result of cpDNA transfer during periods of hybridization or the tenuituba morphology has arisen independently more than once. Ipomopsis tenuituba subsp. macrosiphon has subsequently been segregated as a species. The level of sequence divergence among species was similar in magnitude to that among populations within each species, consistent with patterns of recent divergence and subsequent hybridization among the three species in the complex. In addition, relationships based on cpDNA variation reflected taxonomy and geographic distribution more congruently than did allozymes. The results from this study suggest that evolution of the I. aggregata complex has involved cases of chloroplast DNA transfer between taxa, convergent evolution for certain floral characters, or both.
S11x4x95c20c26c50	A. A. Anderberg	1994	Phylogeny of the Empetraceae, with special emphasis on character evolution in the genus Empetrum	Systematic Botany	19		35-46				The Empetraceae have been subject to cladistic analysis to evaluate their phylogenetic interrelationships, and to investigate character evolution in the genus Empetrum. The results indicate that all genera are monophyletic as presently circumscribed, and that red-fruited diploid Empetrum, today found in the Southern Hemisphere, are the sister-group of the black-fruited crowberries. Black-fruited, as well as purple-fruited, tetraploid crowberries are hypothesized to have evolved from diploid black-fruited ancestors in the Northern Hemisphere. The present investigation casts new light on the evolution and biogeography of the family and shows the fallacy of assuming that small disjunct populations must be derived from larger, more widespread ones.
S11x6x95c09c53c32	D. A. Baum;K. J. Sytsma;P. C. Hoch	1994	A phylogenetic analysis of Epilobium (Onagraceae) based on nuclear ribosomal DNA sequences	Systematic Botany	19		363-388				The internal transcribed spacers and 5.8S cistron of nuclear ribosomal DNA were sequence from 22 species of Epilobium and two outgroups. Phylogenies were inferred from the sequences using parsimony neighbor-joining maximum-likelihood and compatibility analysis. With parsimony we explored the effect of different weights for insertions/deletions (indwells) vs. substitutions coding vs. non-coding regions transitions vs. transversions and a post~riori character reweighting. Section Chamaenerion was fount to be sister to the rest of the genus. The remainder of Epilobium fell into two main clades: 1) sect. Epilobium, and 2) the xerophytic clate which comprises the remaining six sections. The unusual species E. rigidum (sect. Epilobium) hat an uncertain position appearing either at the base of sect. Epilobium, the base of the xerophytic clate or as sister to the entire genus except sect. Chamaenerion. Within the xerophytic clate relationships were incompletely resolved but a monophyletic group consisting of the annual sects Boisduvalia and Currania (both formerly constituting the genus Boisduvalia) and the perennial hummingbird- pollinated sect. Zauschneria was supported. The molecular phylogeny is compatible with some important independent characters and is useful for interpreting morphological and cytological evolution in Epilobium.
S2x7x96c17c46c22	S. J. Brunsfeld;P. S. Soltis;D. E. Soltis;P. A. Gadek;C. J. Quinn;D. D. Strenge;T. A. Ranker	1994	Phylogenetic relationships among the genera of Taxodiaceae and Cupressaceae: Evidence from rbcL sequence	Systematic Botany	19		253-262				DNA sequences from the plastid gene rbcL were used to assess relationships among genera of the conifer families Taxodiaceae and Cupressaceae s. str. Phylogenetic analyses produced four most parsimonious trees that differ only in the positions of three genera (Athrotaxis, Taxodium, and Taiwania) and the degree of resolution of a trichotomy within Cupressaceae s. str. Taxodiaceae and Cupressaceae form a monophyletic group. The major lineages of Taxodiaceae diverged first, and a monophyletic Cupressaceae s. str. are derived from within Taxodiaceae. These results are consistent with recent suggestions that the two families be treated as a single family, Cupressaceae s.l. Sciadopitys, often classified in Taxodiaceae, is not closely related to Cupressaceae s.l. and should be excluded from the family. Sequence evolution of rbcL is extremely slow in this group of long-lived trees. The rate of silent nucleotide substitutions is 2.5 x 10^(-11) per site per year, approximately 13 times slower than rates estimated in short-lived monocots.
S1x29x96c14c28c44	D. S. Conant;D. B. Stein;A. E. C. Valinski;P. Sudarsanam	1994	Phylogenetic implications of chloroplast DNA variation in the Cyatheaceae. I	Systematic Botany	19		60-72				Restriction site maps of the chloroplast DNA of four tree ferns (Alsophila bryophila, Cyathea furfuracea, Sphaeropteris cooperi, and Lophosoria quadripinnata) have been constructed using four enzymes. Genome sizes were estimated as ranging from 161.8 kilobases for L. quadripinnata to 179.2 kilobases for C. furfuracea, the largest sizes thus far reported for ferns. Evolutionary relationships of 23 species of Cyatheaceae were assessed by comparative chloroplast DNA restriction site mapping. A total of 67 restriction site mutations, 58 of which were phylogenetically informative, was detected using 20 restriction enzymes. Phylogenetic analyses of restriction site mutations were carried out using both Wagner and Dollo parsimony and the resulting monophyletic groups were evaluated by bootstrapping. The data show strong support for three major evolutionary lineages within the family: the Alsophila clade, the Cyathea clade, and the Sphaeropteris clade. The Alsophila clade appears to be the most basal group in the family whereas the Cyathea and Sphaeropteris clades are derived sister groups. Comparison of these results to the three modern classification systems for the family demonstrates that our findings are most consistent with the system of Lellinger.
S2x7x96c17c50c33	S. R. Downie;J. D. Palmer	1994	A chloroplast DNA phylogeny of the Caryophyllales based on structural and inverted repeat restriction site variation	Systematic Botany	19		236-252				Phylogenetic relationships among 25 representatives of the Caryophyllales and three outgroup taxa from Polygonaceae and Plumbaginaceae were assessed using structural variation in the chloroplast genome and restriction site variation in the highly conserved inverted repeat region of the chloroplast genome. In addition to the previously reported loss of the chloroplast rpl2 intron in the common ancestor of the Caryophyllales, observed structural mutations include: 1) the loss of the rpll6 intron in the chloroplast genome of Limonium (Plumbaginaceae); 2) three large, phylogenetically informative deletions within the gene 0RF2280, and 3) parallel, 6-kb inversions in the large single-copy region of the chloroplast genomes in Pereskia (Cactaceae) and in Atriplex and Chenopodium (Chenopodiaceae). Sixty-two of the 161 restriction sites scored were phylogenetically informative. Parsimony analyses of the structural and restriction site characters indicate that: 1) the Caryophyllales consist of two major clades, one comprising Amaranthaceae and Chenopodiaceae, and the other all remaining families; 2) two families, Phytolaccaceae and Portulacaceae (Portulaca and Claytonia), are polyphyletic, with elements of the former (Phytolacca and Rivina) strongly linked with Nyctaginaceae; 3) Pereskia (the only examined representative of Cactaceae) is, surprisingly, strongly linked to Portulaca, and 4) Caryophyllaceae and Molluginaceae, the only anthocyanin- producing taxa in the order, occur in the same portion of the trees and are not basal to the group. Relationships among several families are poorly resolved.
S11x6x95c08c40c53	J. V. Freudenstein;J. J. Doyle	1994	Plastid DNA, morphological variation, and the Phylogenetic Species Concept: The Corallorhiza maculata (Orchidaceae) Complex	Systematic Botany	19		273-290				The Phylogenetic Species Concept (PSC) defines minimal phylogenetic units. Although its full application requires sampling within populations, the principles of the PSC can be applied even in cases where intrapopulational sampling has not been conducted, albeit with less resolution. One or more accessions from each of thirty-five populations of Corallorhiza maculata, as well as from C. mertensiana and C. sp. nov., were sampled for plastid DNA and morphological features, and the patterns of variation were interpreted in the light of the PSC. These three species have unique morphological character combinations that allow their recognition as phylogenetic species; previously detected morphological-phenological groups within C. maculata are distinct in parts of the species' range, but morphological intermediates are present in some areas, preventing their recognition as phylogenetic species. Nine plastome types, based upon restriction site and length mutations, were found among the populations, eight of them within C. maculata. The plastomes of C. sp. nov. and C. mertensiana were found to be most closely related to those within C. maculata. Although there was no evidence that plastome types are fixed in populations (due to insufficient sampling), particular restriction sites are hypothesized to be fixed in population groups and are recognized as phylogenetic characters for these groups. The phylogenetic pattern suggests that C. mertensiana and C. sp. nov. were derived from ancestors much like C. maculata, or from C. maculata itself. In addition, the strong correlation between related plastome types and morphology suggests that there may be phylogenetic significance to the pattern within C. maculata.
S11x5x95c20c19c10	L. A. Johnson;D. E. Soltis	1994	matK DNA sequences and phylogenetic reconstruction in Saxifragaceae s. str	Systematic Botany	19		143-156				Comparative DNA sequencing of matK, a maturase coding gene located within the intron of the chloroplast gene trnK, was evaluated for phylogenetic utility using genera of Saxifragaceae s. str. The entire matK gene was sequenced for two members of the family, Sullivantia sullivantii and Saxifraga integrifolia. Comparison of base substitution rates between these two species indicated that matK evolves approximately three-fold faster than rbcL. Comparative sequencing of 754 base pairs within matK was subsequently conducted using 25 genera in Saxifragaceae s. str. and two outgroup taxa. Summed over the 31 taxa sequenced for this 754 base pair region, 40% of the base positions were variable and 15.6% were potentially informative. Five insertion/deletion events of three or six base pairs were also detected. Skewness and randomization tests both suggest that significant non-random structure is present in the matK data set. Parsimony analyses provided 72 most parsimonious trees of 223 steps (excluding autapomorphies) with a consistency index of 0.565. Several well-supported groups of genera are highly concordant with relationships suggested by two other chloroplast DNA data sets: chloroplast DNA restriction sites and rbcL sequences.
S2x3x96c12c30c38	S. R. Larson;J. Doebley	1994	Restriction site variation in the chloroplast genome of Tripsacum (Poaceae): Phylogeny and rates of sequence evolution	Systematic Botany	19		21-34				Restriction site variation was surveyed in the chloroplast genome (cpDNA) of 14 species of Tripsacum, two species of Zea, and an outgroup, Elionurus tripsacoides. A total of 783 cpDNA restriction sites was surveyed using 22 restriction endonucleases, revealing 110 polymorphic restriction sites among or within the species. We observed a relatively low level of cpDNA sequence divergence among Tripsacum species (0.0 to 0.0036 substitutions per site) as compared to other genera of flowering plants. The level of cpDNA sequence divergence between Zea and Tripsacum is also low (0.007 substitutions per site), suggesting that these genera are closely related. Variable restriction sites were used to construct parsimony phylogenetic trees. These trees failed to show close agreement with taxonomic relationships within Tripsacum. The trees do not show a division of Tripsacum into sects. Tripsacum and Fasciculata. Chloroplast DNA also indicates that T. dactyloides is not monophyletic. Comparison of cpDNA and rDNA restriction site variation suggests that interspecific introgressive hybridization could explain the low level of congruence between taxonomy and cpDNA. Tests of the molecular clock hypothesis indicate that cpDNA evolves more rapidly in Zea than in Tripsacum.
S11x6x95c09c11c15	K. Mummenhoff;M. Koch	1994	Chloroplast DNA restriction site variation and phylogenetic relationships in the genus Thlaspi sensu lato (Brassicaceae)	Systematic Botany	19		73-88				The classification of the genus Thlaspi s.l. is difficult and controversial. All hypotheses have been based on morphological and anatomical data and no cladistic analyses have been performed. In the current study restriction site variation of chloroplast DNA among 45 populations of 22 taxa was employed to assess phylogenetic relationships in the genus Thlaspi. Although only 22 taxa have been analyzed herein (ca. 30% worldwide) these species represent all sections. One length mutation and 114 restriction site mutations were detected. Cladistic analysis of the chloroplast DNA data supported four groups that are congruent with four segregate genera (Thlaspi s. str., Microthlaspi, Noccaea, and Raparia), previously recognized by Meyer on the basis of seed anatomy. Sequence divergence between these groups was higher than usually found in intrageneric analyses and comparable to levels of divergence between related genera of other angiosperm families. The chloroplast DNA phylogeny suggests that the perennial taxa are not ancestral to the annual taxa and that the annual habit originated more than once in Thlaspi s.l. A paucity of restriction site mutations precludes resolving relationships among species of Noccaea, whereas the two intraspecific taxa of the T. perfoliatum polyploid complex (Microthlaspi) were separated by at least 17 restriction site mutations. Consideration of chloroplast DNA divergence within the clades Noccaea and Microthlaspi indicates that the rate of plastome evolution is uncoupled from rates of morphological/anatomical diversification. Chloroplast DNA polymorphisms were detected among eight populations of T. perfoliatum subsp. perfoliatum with different ploidy levels. There seems to be geographic partitioning of the two plastome types found, possibly warranting taxonomic recognition.
S2x3x96c13c53c07	D. Potter;J. J. Doyle	1994	Phylogeny and systematics of Sphenostylis and Nesphostylis (Leguminosae: Phaseoleae) based on morphological and chloroplast DNA data	Systematic Botany	19		389-406				Sphenostylis and Nesphostylis (Leguminosae: Phaseoleae) together include about ten species in tropical Africa, India, and Burma. The two are considered sister genera based on the presence, in all species, of a cuneate dorsiventrally flattened style. Cladistic analysis of morphological characters for species of Sphenostylis and Nesphostylis and two outgroup taxa generated eleven equally parsimonious trees, which differed in hypotheses of relationship between Sphenostylis and related genera and among species of Sphenostylis. Cladistic analysis of restriction site data for the chloroplast DNA of a subset of these taxa produced two trees, which differed from one another only in hypotheses of relationship among plastomes of subspecies of S. erecta. Both of the chloroplast DNA- based trees, some of the morphology-based trees, and trees from cladistic analysis of combined data supported the traditionally recognized sister relationship between Sphenostylis and Nesphostylis and revealed two major clades within Sphenostylis one including the purple-flowered taxa except S. bracteata and one including the yellow-flowered taxa. The divergence between these clades was greater for chloroplast DNA data than for morphological data. In view of the results obtained, the following taxonomic changes are made: transfer of S. bracteata to Nesphostylis, as Nesphostylis bracteata, restoration of S. erecta to specific status, and transfer of S. marginata subsp. obtusifolia to S. erecta, as Sphenostylis erecta subsp. obtusifolia. With these changes, Sphenostylis now includes seven species in tropical and southern Africa and Nesphostylis comprises three species: one each in tropical Africa, India, and Burma
S301	J. F. Smith;K. J. Sytsma	1994	Evolution in the Andean epiphytic genus Columnea (Gesneriaceae). II. Chloroplast DNA restriction site variation	Systematic Botany	19		317-336				A cladistic analysis of chloroplast DNA (cpDNA) restriction site variation was performed on Columnea (Gesneriaceae) sections Pentadenia and Stygnanthe. Two species of Alloplectus were included in the analyses and one of Drymonia was used as the outgroup. Restriction site variation was analyzed using Wagner parsimony and character state weighting that favors convergent losses over convergent gains. The large numbers of equally most parsimonious trees prevented examination of each tree independently. Thus, examination of phylogenetic relationships was based on a strict consensus of all most parsimonious trees. The resulting phylogeny is largely congruent with recent classification schemes, although the positions of several species are not in accordance with traditional relationships. As a result of the cladistic analysis of the cpDNA restriction site variation, section Pentadenia is at least paraphyletic, and possibly polyphyletic with section Stygnanthe. The lack of resolution among the several clades within section Stygnanthe does not provide evidence for or against monophyly of this section. Several clades are strongly supported with cpDNA data and provide insight into biogeography and origin of morphological adaptations.
S302	J. F. Smith;K. J. Sytsma	1994	Evolution in the Andean epiphytic genus Columnea (Gesneriaceae). I. Morphological variation	Systematic Botany	19		220-235				A cladistic analysis was performed on morphological data from seven of the nine species of Columnea section Pentadenia and sixteen of the eighteen species of section Stygnanthe (Gesneriaceae). A nested, global outgroup analysis was performed by including representatives of three other sections of Columnea and two species each of the closely related genera Alloplectus and Drymonia. Twenty characters were scored as binary, and thirteen were scored as multi-state. All characters scored were qualitative. Because of the high levels of homoplasy in the Gesneriaceae, simple characters were not found to be useful and more complex characters comprising several simple characters were necessary to provide resolution. The data were analyzed using Wagner parsimony, resulting in eight most parsimonious trees. In general, the phylogeny was congruent with current classification schemes and phylogenies derived from molecular data and combined molecular and morphological data. However, several phylogenetic relationships that result from the analysis of morphological data are suspect based on other data. The monophyly of Alloplectus is not supported solely with morphological data, although other data support its monophyly. Inferences regarding the biogeographic history and evolution of Columnea sections Pentadenia and Stygnanthe indicate a southern Andean origin for the genus Columnea with a subsequent migration and radiation northward.
S11x5x95c20c27c21	K. P. Steele;R. Vilgalys	1994	Phylogenetic analyses of Polemoniaceae using nucleotide sequences of the plastid gene matK	Systematic Botany	19		126-142				Nucleotide sequences of the plastid encoded gene matK were examined for their potential utility in phylogenetic analyses within angiosperm families. Sequences 661 bases in length were obtained from twenty species of Polemoniaceae. Phylogenetic analyses resulted in four equally parsimonious trees with a consistency index of 0.70. Several well supported groups allowed us to test hypotheses of relationship within Polemoniaceae. The segregation of Ipomopsis and Allophyllum from Gilia was.supported by the placement of each in distinct groups separate from a group of four species of Gilia. Several strongly supported groups include genera now placed in different tribes. There was no support for the current separation of temperate Polemoniaceae into two tribes. The tropical genera were resolved as basal and paraphyletic within the family. The family as a whole was monophyletic with no support for the segregate family Cobaeaceae. Sequences of matK, a gene that had not been used previously for phylogenetic analyses, provided a sufficient number of reliable characters for phylogenetic analysis within Polemoniaceae. Pairwise comparisons of matK and rbcL sequences of the same taxa were performed. Sequences of matK varied at an overall rate twice that of rbcL sequences. Substitutions at the third codon position predominated in rbcL sequences, while in matK substitutions were more evenly distributed across codon positions.
S2x2x96c16c26c59	P. O. Karis	1995	Cladistics of the subtribe Ambrosiinae (Asteraceae: Heliantheae) 	Systematic Botany	20	1	40-54		http://www.jstor.org/stable/2419631		The interrelationships within the Heliantheae-Ambrosiinae are investigated using cladistic analysis of morphological and cytological data. Twenty-eight species sampled from all genera of the Ambrosiinae are used as terminal taxa. The result reveals that Iva s.l. is polyphyletic. In order to make the different parts of Iva s.l. monophyletic, the following taxa should be recognized: Iva s. str. comprising Iva section Linearbractea and Iva section Iva, Chorisiva, Leuciva, Oxytenia, and Cyclachaena s. str. The two genera Hymenoclea and Xanthium are monophyletic ingroups in a paraphyletic Ambrosia. Therefore, both these genera might be reduced to synonyms under Ambrosia if further investigations using more species as terminal taxa come to the same result.
S11x6x95c10c06c51	T. Sang;D. J. Crawford;T. F. Stuessy;M. Silva O	1995	ITS sequences and the phylogeny of the genus Robinsonia (Asteraceae)	Systematic Botany	20	1	55-64		http://www.jstor.org/stable/2419632		Sequences from the internal transcribed spacer region (ITS) of nuclear ribosomal DNA were used to produce a hypothesis of phylogenetic relationships of six of the seven known species of Robinsonia, the second largest genus endemic to the Juan Fernandez Islands. Sequence divergence between species ranges from 0 00 to 6 77% [mean (3.65 + 2.15)%] and all sequences are the same length. One most parsimonious tree was produced from the 70 variable nucleotide sites, including the species of Senecio as outgroups; this had a consistency index of 0.92 excluding uninformative sites. The cladogram is fully concordant with one generated from morphology, with R. berteroi, the only species of subg. Rhetinodendron, as the sister taxon to the remaining species in subg. Robinsonia. Within subg. Robinsonia, sects. Eleutherolepis and Robinsonia are monophyletic. Within the former section, R. masafuerae, the only species of Robinsonia on the younger island of Masafuera, is the sister species to R. evenia, as it is in the phylogeny based on morphology. ITS sequences also provide strong support for the monophyly of Robinsonia. The average rate of ITS sequence divergence within the genus was estimated to be at least (7.83 + 0.74) x 10(-9) per site per year. Relative rate tests indicate that the molecular clock cannot be rejected for ITS sequence evolution in Robinsonia. The mode and tempo of ITS and cpDNA evolution were compared in Robinsonia and Dendroseris, the two largest endemic genera on the Juan Fernandez Islands. In both genera mean sequence divergence between species was higher in ITS than in cpDNA. The distribution of mutations in ITS and cpDNA differ between the two genera. In Dendroseris ITS sequences produced the same phylogeny as cpDNA whereas in Robinsonia, cpDNA restriction site mutations did not resolve phylogenetic relationships among the studied species while ITS sequences generated a highly resolved phylogeny
S260	S. G. Weller;W. L. Wagner;A. K. Sakai	1995	A phylogenetic analysis of Schiedea and Alsinidendron (Caryophyllaceae: Alsinoideae): implications for the evolution of breeding systems	Systematic Botany	20	3	315-337		http://www.jstor.org/stable/2419498		Phylogenetic analysis of Schiedea and Alsinidendron (Caryophyllaceae), a monophyletic lineage endemic to the Hawaiian Islands, produced six equally most parsimonious trees with 132 steps using morphological characters. Four major clades were found in all trees. Breeding system characters were excluded from the analysis because of the likelihood that dimorphism (gynodioecy, subdioecy, dioecy) has evolved in parallel in Schiedea, although subsequent inclusion of these characters had little effect on topology. Dimorphism is found in the two clades occurring primarily in dry habitats. Mapping of breeding systems on the phylogeny suggests that dimorphism has probably evolved on two or more occasions, depending on the number of character states and whether the character is treated as ordered or unordered. One to several reversals from dimorphism to hermaphroditism have also occurred. Dimorphic species occur only in dry habitats, but mapping of habitat on the phylogeny suggests that hermaphroditic species originally may have invaded dry habitats without evolving a dimorphic breeding system. Ecological shifts to very wet habitats appear to have favored the evolution of autogamy, which has occurred independently in the two clades largely restricted to mesic or wet habitats. The striking variation in breeding systems found in Schiedea and Alsinidendron appears to result in large part from the invasion of diverse habitats in the Hawaiian Islands following colonization by the ancestor of this lineage.
S503	J. E. Rodman;K. G. Karol;R. A. Price;K. J. Sytsma	1996	Molecules, morphology, and Dahlgren's expanded order Capparales	Systematic Botany	21	3	289-307		http://www.jstor.org/stable/2419660		Nucleotide sequences for the chloroplast gene rbcL have been obtained for three species of Salvadoraceae and for the unispecific Pentadiplandraceae, thus completing a survey of all known mustard-oil families. Phylogenetic analyses of the sequences based on maximum parsimony reveal two separate lineages of plants that produce mustard oil glucosides. A major mustard-oil clade comprises the core capparalean families of Brassicaceae, Capparaceae, Gyrostemonaceae, Resedaceae, and Tovariaceae and includes Akaniaceae, Bataceae, Bretschneideraceae, Caricaceae, Koeberliniaceae, Limnanthaceae, Moringaceae, Pentadiplandraceae, Salvadoraceae, and Tropaeolaceae. A second, unrelated lineage consists of the genus Drypetes, traditionally placed in Euphorbiaceae. The major mustard-oil clade recovered from the rbcL analysis is congruent in many topological aspects with that found in a recent cladistic study of morphological characters, and in turn the molecular and morphological results confirm Dahlgren's radically expanded Capparales. An approach combining molecular and morphological evidence yields robust support for several lineages within this major mustard-oil clade.
S6x25x97c14c21c28	T. Eriksson;M. J. Donoghue	1997	Phylogenetic relationships of Sambucus and Adoxa (Adoxoideae, Adoxaceae) based on nuclear ribosomal ITS sequences and preliminary morphological data	Systematic Botany	22	3	555-573		http://www.jstor.org/stable/2419828		We inferred the phylogeny of Sambucus and Adoxa (Adoxoideae, Adoxaceae) based on nucleotide sequences of the internal transcribed spacer (ITS) region of nuclear ribosomal DNA, preliminary morphology, and a combination of the two data sets. Our morphological analysis implies that Adoxa is nested within Sambucus, based primarily on herbaceous habit and aspects of flower morphology. However, there is strong support for the monophyly of Sambucus based on ITS sequences and in the combined analysis, implying that morphological similarities shared by Adoxa and the two Australian species of Sambucus may have evolved independently. The relatively small variation in ITS sequences within Sambucus makes the sequences easy to align, but results in some ambiguity due to a limited number of informative characters. Nevertheless, there are several well supported clades within Sambucus. Species with paniculate inflorescences (section Botryosambucus) form a well supported clade, within which the red fruited species are monophyletic. These results support the view that paniculate infloresences and red fruits evolved independently in Sambucus and Viburnum. In all analyses S. ebulus and its relatives (sections Ebulus and Scyphidanthe) form a clade supported by valvate corolla lobes. Based on the combined analysis the first Adoxoideae may have been characterized by flowers with an equal number of carpels and perianth parts, and more or less separated style branches/stigma lobes. If so, reduction in the number of carpels and fusion of styles occurred within Sambucus.
S448	D. H. Les;M. A. Cleland;M. Waycott	1997	Phylogenetic studies in Alismatidae, II: evolution of marine angiosperms (seagrasses) and hydrophily	Systematic Botany	22	3	443-463		http://www.jstor.org/stable/2419820		Aquatic species represent fewer than two percent of all flowering plants, and only 18 aquatic genera have acquired true hydrophily (water-pollination) which is associated with an unusually high incidence of unisexual flowers. From the subset of submersed, hydrophilous angiosperms, only 13 genera have colonized marine habitats. The evolution of hydrophily, unisexuality, and marine habit in angiosperms was explored using estimates of phylogeny obtained by phylogenetic analyses of chloroplast (rbcL) gene sequence data. Despite what might appear to be difficult evolutionary transitions, hydrophiles are highly polyphyletic with independent origins in the monocotyledon subclass Alismatidae in addition to two derivations in the dicotyledon families Ceratophyllaceae and Callitrichaceae. Yet, even in alismatids, hydrophily has evolved many times. Unisexuality has also evolved repeatedly in the Alismatidae, and is ancestral to the evolution of hydrophiles and marine plants in the Hydrocharitaceae. Marine angiosperms (known only from Alismatidae) have evolved in three separate lineages. The multiple origins of hydrophilous, marine plants offer an extraordinary example of convergent evolution in angiosperms.
S10x10x96c17c24c50	R. G. Olmstead;J. D. Palmer	1997	Implications for the phylogeny, classification, and biogeography of Solanum from cpDNA restriction site variation	Systematic Botany	22	1	19-29		http://www.jstor.org/stable/2419675		A phylogenetic analysis of Solanum based on chloroplast DNA restriction site variation is presented. The results confirm previous findings that Lycopersicon and Cyphomandra are derived from within Solanum. Three out of four Solanum subgenera with more than one representative in this analysis (Minon, Potatoe, Solanum) are found to be polyphyletic, suggesting that the subgeneric classification of the genus needs revision. Subgenus Leptostemonum is monophyletic within the context of our sampling. Three primary clades can be distinguished within Solanum. Clade I includes representatives of sections Archaesolanum, Dulcamara, Holophylla, Jasminosolanum, and Solanum. Clade II includes members of subgenus Potatoe (sections Basarthrum, Lycopersicon, and Petota). Clade III includes all representatives sampled from subg. Leptostemonum, sects. Allophyllum, Brevantherum, Geminata, Pseduocapsicum, and Cyphomandropsis, and the genus Cypohomandra. Solanum as a whole and each of the three primary clades apppear to be New World in origin. Within Leptostemonum, African and Australian members are derived from New World ancestors.
S319	P. D. Cantino;S. J. Wagstaff;R. G. Olmstead	1998	Caryopteris (Lamiaceae) and the conflict between phylogenetic and pragmatic considerations in botanical nomenclature	Systematic Botany	23	3	369-386		http://www.jstor.org/stable/2419511		The delimitation of Caryopteris (Lamiaceae) exemplifies the conflict between the representation of monophyletic groups and pragmatic concerns in Linnaean classification. Cladistic analyses of nonmolecular (mainly morphological) data and chloroplast DNA (rbcL and ndhF) sequences were performed to test the monophyly of the eastern Asian genus Caryopteris. The results corroborate earlier studies indicating that Caryopteris is either para- or polyphyletic. If paraphyletic, other genera whose sister groups lie within the currently accepted limits of Caryopteris include Trichostema, Rubiteucris, and probably Ajuga, Schnabelia, and Amethystea. Because phylogenetic resolution is too poor to refer all of the species of Caryopteris to well supported clades, a choice must be made between recognizing a paraphyletic genus or several monotypic ones, three of which would comprise morphologically quite similar species. A compromise solution is adopted in which three new genera are described (Pseudocaryopteris, Discretitheca, and Tripora), the latter two monotypic, and four species of Caryopteris are transferred to other genera, one of which may not be monophyletic. Nine new combinations are provided: Discretitheca nepalensis, Pseudocaryopteris bicolor, Pseudocaryopteris foetida, Pseudocaryopteris paniculata, Rubiteucris siccanea, Schnabelia aureoglandulosa, Schnabelia nepetifolia, Schnabelia terniflora, and Tripora divaricata. For comparative purposes, an alternative classification is provided that employs de Queiroz and Gauthierπs phylogenetic system of nomenclature. Using this system, no new names are required, and all supraspecific taxa are both monophyletic and easily recognizable.
S444	C. D. Bell;R. W. Patterson;L. A. Hamilton	1999	Sectional integrety in Linanthus (Polemoniaceae): a molecular phylogeny of section Dianthoides	Systematic Botany	24	4	632-644		http://www.jstor.org/stable/2419647		The 44 species of Linanthus are arranged into six sections based on morphological features. Five of the sections are readily circumscribed and have not presented infrageneric problems to botanists. Section Dianthoides, however, is not morphologically cohesive. It consists of eight annual species sensu Grant, with diverse ranges and habitats in southern California and northern Baja California. Vegetative and floral features suggest that the section, as traditionally defined, may not be monophyletic. However, these data do not offer a clear view of relationships among these species or of these species within the genus. To test the monophyly of sect. Dianthoides and to decipher relationships among the species, we conducted a phylogenetic analysis using sequence data from the ITS region of nuclear ribosomal DNA. We sampled all ten species from both Grant and Patterson's treatments of sect. Dianthoides and at least one species from each of the other five sections. These data support a paraphyletic Linanthus, which is consistent with the findings of other molecular studies. Trees obtained show two lineages of Linanthus: one comprising sect. Dianthoides, two species of sect. Linanthus (sensu Grant), members of Leptodactylon and two species of Gilia included in the analyses and a second lineage composed of the remaining four sections of Linanthus and Phlox.
S751	A. Delgado-Salinas;T. Turley;A. Richman;M. Lavin	1999	Phylogenetic analysis of cultivated and wild species of Phaseolus (Fabaceae)	Systematic Botany	24	3	438-460		http://www.jstor.org/stable/2419699		The species of Phaseolus were exhaustively sampled for both ITS/5.8S DNA sequence and non-molecular data. With all related New World genera designated as outgroups, a phylogenetic analysis of combined data reveals a strongly supported monophyletic Phaseolus. Other well supported relationships include nine monophyletic species clades within Phaseolus, designated as the P. vulgaris, P. filiformis, P. lunatus, P. polystachios, P. leptostachyus, P. pauciflorus, P. tuerckheimii, and P. pedicellatus groups, and P. microcarpus. Only the last of these is monotypic and consistently resolved in a sensitivity analysis as the earliest branch in the Phaseolus clade, though with poor bootstrap support. The five most commonly domesticated species in the genus arise from within the P. vulgaris and P. lunatus groups. The gene pools traditionally recognized for the domesticated species P. vulgaris and P. lunatus are not detected with ITS sequence variation. This is in spite of a very high degree of inter- and intra-specific ITS sequence divergence in Phaseolus.
S352	R. Spangler;B. Zaitchik;E. Russo;E. Kellogg	1999	Andropogoneae evolution and generic limits in Sorghum (Poaceae) using ndhF sequences	Systematic Botany	24	2	267-281		http://www.jstor.org/stable/2419552		DNA sequences of the chloroplast gene ndhF were used to estimate the phylogeny of the grass tribe Andropogoneae. Previous hypotheses of relationship in the tribe were based on cytological and morphological characters such as the presence/absence of awns, monoecy vs. andromonoecy, or inflorescence characteristics. Classifications were subsequently proposed based on those ideas of relationships, and these are examined in the context of the molecular data. The notion that the base number of the tribe is x=5 is tested using the phylogeny. Diploids with n=5 are not conclusively the earliest diverging members of the group, but are nested high in the tree and the earliest diverging lineages in the tribe have n=10. Subtribal designations are not informative due to the lack of resolution between clades in the strict consensus tree. There are well-supported clades in the tribe, including three Sorghum lineages and a core Andropogoneae clade, even though relationships among clades are poorly supported. The topological pattern suggests a rapid radiation for the group. A preliminary assessment of the generic limits of the genus Sorghum show it to be paraphyletic, including the genera Cleistachne, Miscanthus, and a species of Microstegium. Subtribe Sorghinae is represented here by Sorghum, Sorghastrum, Cleistachne, Bothriochloa, Capillipedium, Dichanthium, and Chrysopogon and does not form a monophyletic group.
S348	B. A. Whitlock;D. A. Baum	1999	Phylogenetic relationships of Theobroma and Herrania based on sequences of the nuclear gene vicilin	Systematic Botany	24	2	128-138		http://www.jstor.org/stable/2419544		Phylogenetic relationships were examined within the genera Theobroma and Herrania using 18 species representing all recognized sections of both genera and three outgroups. DNA sequences for vicilin, a gene encoding a putative seed storage protein, were analyzed using parsimony. Both Herrania and Theobroma appear monophyletic on the most-parsimonious trees, but the monophyly of Theobroma is only weakly supported. The monophyly of all currently recognized sections of both genera was supported with the exception of Theobroma section Glossopetalum within which was nested the monotypic section Andropetalum. The analysis sheds light on the morphological diversification of these closely related genera and serves to demonstrate the potential phylogenetic utility of vicilin.
S537	M. F. Wojciechowski;M. J. Sanderson;J. M. Hu	1999	Evidence on the Monophyly of Astragalus (Fabaceae) and its Major Subgroups Based on Nuclear Ribosomal DNA ITS and Chloroplast DNA trnL Intron Data	Systematic Botany	24	3	409-437		http://www.jstor.org/stable/2419698		Phylogenetic relationships among 115 species representing the legume genus Astragalus and 12 related genera were inferred from an analysis of nucleotide sequence variation in the internal transcribed spacers and 5.8S gene of nuclear ribosomal DNA. For a subset of these taxa, the ITS data were supplemented by sequences from the chloroplast trnL intron. Phylogenies derived from maximum parsimony and neighbor-joining analyses of sequence and insertion/deletion characters all suggest that the vast majority of Astragalus is monophyletic (with the exception of ìoutlierî species). All New World Astragalus species with aneuploid chromosome numbers (n = 11ñ15) form a monophyletic group (ìNeo-Astragalusî), which now includes the Mediterranean aneuploid Astragalus echinatus. Other Old World aneuploid species are not closely related to Neo-Astragalus, but rather are found among Old World euploid (n = 8, 16) groups. Similarly, the relatively few North American species with euploid numbers are not the closest relatives to Neo-Astragalus but are dispersed among divergent Old World groups that include both aneuploid and euploid species. The historically allied genus Oxytropis is not nested within Astragalus, but forms a separate clade within the larger ìAstragaleanî clade. The proposed segregate genera Astracantha (Eurasian) and Orophaca (North American) are clearly nested within Astragalus s. str. South American species of Astragalus are nested within Neo-Astragalus and comprise at least two independently derived clades (along with their close North American relatives), as previously suggested by morphology. Parsimony reconstructions of characters that have been used in the traditional subgeneric taxonomy of the genus were examined and show high levels of homoplasy. Preliminary estimates of the absolute rate of species diversification in Astragalus suggest it may be higher than in some other, often cited, continental or insular adaptive radiations in angiosperms.
S407	W. J. Baker;J. Dransfield;T. A. Hedderson	2000	Phylogeny, Character Evolution, and a New Classification of the Calamoid Palms	Systematic Botany	25	2	297-322	10.2307/2666644			The remarkable morphological diversity of the palm subfamily Calamoideae provides a paradigm for evolutionary studies of palm structure and function. Phylogenetic relationships among the 22 calamoid genera are investigated here in simultaneous analyses of morphological data and DNA sequences from nuclear ITS regions and chloroplast rps16 intron. The resultant hypotheses of relationship are used to explore morphological character evolution through an examination of character state optimisations. The evolution of habit and its associated characters is found to be highly homoplasious; for example, multiple origins of both the acaulescent and climbing growth forms have been identified. Similarly, life history and reproductive characters show complex patterns of evolution with few primary homology assessments proving to be effective judgements of synapomorphy. Many of these homoplasious characters were emphasised in the previous classification of the Calamoideae and consequently some non-monophyletic groups were recognised formally. We present a new classification in which a number of unexpected, group-defining characters, such as the number of pollen apertures, have been identified. The classification comprises three tribes and nine subtribes, including one newly described tribe Eugeissoneae. However, the morphology of many well supported clades remains poorly understood, creating further challenges for future studies in calamoid phylogeny.
S511	J. C. Barber;J. Francisco-Ortega;A. Santos-Guerra;A. Marrero;R. K. Jansen	2000	Evolution of endemic Sideritis (Lamiaceae) in Macaronesia: insights from a chloroplast DNA restriction site analysis	Systematic Botany	25	4	633-647	10.2307/2666725			Sideritis L. subgenus Marrubiastrum (Lamiaceae) comprises 24 species of Macaronesian endemic perennials. The constituent taxa encompass a wide array of life forms that have exploited all ecological zones present in the Macaronesian archipelagos of Madeira and the Canary Islands. Though recently revised, an explicit phylogeny of the subgenus is still lacking. This group is especially intriguing because it exhibits the largest aneuploid series ever reported in oceanic island plants. The present study uses a chloroplast DNA restriction site analysis to elucidate the pattern of evolution within and among the islands. The insular taxa form a strongly supported monophyletic group, indicating a single colonization of Macaronesia. Monophyly of the sections is not supported. Integrating geographical and ecological distribution with the cpDNA phylogeny reveals a pattern of diversification within the islands consistent with adaptive radiation. Most other Macaronesian plant groups studied thus far have diversified by inter-island colonization between similar ecological zones. An analysis of chromosome number suggests a bimodal pattern of chromosomal change in the island subgenus, with one clade showing a decreasing aneuploid series and a second clade exhibiting aneuploid increase. The rate of change appears markedly amplified relative to that of the continental subgenus. This extreme level of chromosomal diversity stands in stark contrast to a general pattern of chromosomal stasis in island plants.
S755	M. Lavin;M. Thulin;J. N. Labat;R. T. Pennington	2000	Africa, the odd man out: molecular biogeography of dalbergioid legumes (Fabaceae) suggests otherwise	Systematic Botany	25	3	449-467	10.2307/2666689			Vicariant biogeographic relationships have been commonly sought, inferred, or assumed between Africa and South America. Yet for disjunct distributions involving North America and the Old World, Africa is rarely considered. We present a molecular biogeographic study in the legume family that suggests a vicariant biogeographical relationship between Africa and North America. Such a relationship is likely to be shown with additional phylogenetic analysis to be prevalent among legume groups and other taxa that diversified during the Tertiary in seasonally dry tropical vegetation. If so, this finding would strengthen the hypothesis that the Tertiary North Atlantic land bridge had a significant influence on the Cenozoic formation of continental biotas, including that of Africa.
S556	A. W. Meerow;C. L. Guy;Q. B. Li;L. L. Yang	2000	Phylogeny of the American Amaryllidaceae based on nrDNA ITS sequences	Systematic Botany	25	4	708-726	10.2307/2666729			Analysis of three plastid DNA sequences for a broad sampling of Amaryllidaceae resolve the American genera of the Amaryllidaceae as a clade that is sister to the Eurasian genera of the family, but base substitution rates for these genes are too low to resolve much of the intergeneric relationships within the American clade. We obtained ITS rDNA sequences for 76 species of American Amaryllidaceae and analyzed the aligned matrix cladistically, both with and without gaps included, using two species of Pancratium as outgroup taxa. ITS resolves two moderately to strongly supported groups, an Andean tetraploid clade, and a primarily extra-Andean hippeastroid clade. Within the hippeastroid clade, the tribe Griffineae is resolved as sister to the rest of Hippeastreae. The genera Rhodophiala and Zephyranthes are resolved as polyphyletic, but the possibility of reticulation within this clade argues against any re-arrangement of these genera without further investigation. Within the Andean subclade, Eustephieae resolves as sister to all other tribes; a distinct petiolate-leafed group is resolved, combining the tribe Eucharideae and the petiolate Stenomesseae; and a distinct Hymenocallideae is supported. These Andean clades are all at least partially supported by plastid sequence data as well. We infer from our data that a great deal of the diversity of the family in the Americas is recent, and that the American Amaryllidaceae may have been reduced to peripheral isolates some time after its initial entry and spread through the Americas. While the sister relationship of the American and Eurasian clades might argue for a Boreotropical origin for the family in America, the cladistic relationships within the American clade based on ITS do not provide any further support for this or any other hypothesis of the family's entry into America. The new tribe Clinantheae is described (four genera: Clinanthus, Pamianthe, Paramongaia and Pucara), and the lorate-leafed species of Stenomesson are transferred to Clinanthus.
S1238	L. E. Urbatsch;B. G. Baldwin;M. J. Donoghue	2000	Phylogeny of the coneflowers and relatives (Heliantheae: Asteraceae) based on nuclear rDNA Internal Transcribed Spacer (ITS) sequences and chlorplast DNA restriction site data	Systematic Botany	25	3	539-565	10.2307/2666695			The internal transcribed spacer (ITS) region of 18S–26S nuclear ribosomal DNA (rDNA) was sequenced in 65 taxa representing most coneflowers (i.e., species in Dracopis, Echinacea, Ratibida, and Rudbeckia) and other taxa representing 21 outgroup genera of tribe Heliantheae. Results of parsimony analysis of the rDNA dataset by itself and in combination with the cpDNA dataset uphold the hypothesis from an earlier cpDNA restriction site study that Echinacea is not closely related to the other three genera of coneflowers. The data support placement of Echinacea in subtribe Zinniinae. The remaining three coneflower genera represent a monophyletic lineage corresponding to subtribe Rudbeckiinae sensu H. Robinson. The rDNA data support two sublineages in Rudbeckia congruent with the two traditionally recognized subgenera, subg. Macrocline and subg. Rudbeckia. In subg. Macrocline, two geographic areas of diversification are indicated: southeastern and western United States. The widespread species R. laciniata is placed strongly with the western lineage of subg. Macrocline. The rDNA data support transfer of Dracopis to Rudbeckia subg. Macrocline, a relationship also supported by multiple morphological characters. The rDNA data do not confidently resolve the sister group of Rudbeckiinae from among the members of Heliantheae investigated. Multiple hypotheses are suggested for the outgroup taxa, such as expanding subtribe Zinniinae to include Echinacea and Trichocoryne, a genus previously regarded as belonging to subtribe Hymenopappinae (Heleneae or Heliantheae sensu lat.). Our findings further support expansion of subtribe Engelmanniinae to include Balsamorhiza, Borrichia, and Wyethia even though these taxa lack ray floret complexes and have fertile disc ovaries. We suggest that bioprospectors might usefully search among taxa of Zinniinae for bioactive substances similar to the immune stimulants of Echinacea.
S382	S. J. Wagstaff;M. I. Dawson	2000	Classification, origin, and patterns of diversification of Corynocarpus (Corynocarpaceae) inferred from DNA sequences	Systematic Botany	25	1	134-149	10.2307/2666679			Sequences from the chloroplast-encoded gene rbcL and the nuclear-encoded internal transcribed spacer (ITS) region were analyzed independently and then combined to infer phylogenetic relationships of Corynocarpus. Relationships obtained from the rbcL and ITS data sets are are largely congruent and well resolved. The combined data set provides even greater support for relationships. The rbcL results support current placement of Corynocarpus in its own distinct family, the Corynocarpaceae, and suggest that this family is most closely related to the Anisophylleaceae, Begoniaceae, Coriariaceae, Cucurbitaceae, Datiscaceae, and Tetramelaceae together comprising the order Cucurbitales. This contradicts traditional classifications, which have placed the Corynocarpaceae in the Celestrales. The five species of Corynocarpus are genetically distinct, but comparison of ITS sequences show little infraspecific sequence variation within C. laevigatus and C. rupestris. The present distribution, fruit morphology, and patterns of relationships inferred from the sequence data suggest a Palaeotropical center of origin and two independent radiations in the Corynocarpaceae. The first radiation comprises C. cribbianus and C. rupestris, which extend through New Guinea to Australia, and the second radiation comprises C. dissimilis and C. laevigatus, which extend southwards through New Caledonia to New Zealand.
S546	N. Wikström;P. Kenrick	2000	Relationships of Lycopodium and Lycopodiella based on combined plastid rbcL gene and trnL intron sequence data	Systematic Botany	25	3	495-510	10.2307/2666692			The relationships of Lycopodium and Lycopodiella (Lycopodiaceae) were investigated based on two plastid data sets (rbcL gene and trnL intron) from a representative sample of 21 species. Separate and combined analyses of the data reveal consistent patterns of relationship. There is strong support for monophyly of Lycopodium and Lycopodiella. There is also support for monophyly of species groups or sections sensu Øllgaard (Lycopodium, Diphasium, Magellanica, Complanata, Lycopodiella, and Campylostachys). The combined data provide new evidence of relationships between subgeneric groups. In Lycopodium, section Pseudodiphasium groups with section Magellanica, section Obscura groups with section Diphasium, and section Annotina groups with section Lycopodium. In Lycopodiella, sections Lateristachys and Caroliniana group with section Campylostachys and this group is sister to section Lycopodiella. Tentative calibration of the phylogenetic tree using fossil evidence indicates a minimum age of Early Jurassic (208 Myr) for the split between Lycopodium and Lycopodiella. Reticulate fossil spores from Upper Permian records are potentially of Lycopodium affinity and indicate that early cladogenesis in Lycopodium may be even older. An evaluation of biogeographic and phylogenetic patterns in these two genera shows a striking difference from that in Huperzia. Sections within Lycopodium and Lycopodiella have broad geographic distributions, whereas molecular data partition the much larger Huperzia group into predominantly neotropical and paleotropical clades.
S611	J. C. Bradford;R. W. Barnes	2001	Phylogenetics and classification of Cunoniaceae (Oxalidales) using chloroplast DNA sequences and morphology	Systematic Botany	26	2	354-385	10.1043/0363-6445-26.2.354	http://www.jstor.org/stable/2666712		A phylogeny and revised classification of the flowering plant family Cunoniaceae and related taxa is presented. Parsimony cladistic analyses, including bootstrap and decay analyses, of chloroplast DNA sequences from two loci, trnL-trnF and rbcL, and morphology show that three genera often placed in their own families, Bauera, Davidsonia, and Eucryphia, are nested within Cunoniaceae. Brunellia may be most closely related to the Australian pitcher plant Cephalotus, and Aphanopetalum is in Saxifragales. Within Cunoniaceae, the New Guinean-South Pacific genera Acsmithia and Spiraeanthemum form a sister clade to the rest of family. Within this larger clade is a basal grade in which flowers mature centrifugally on an inflorescence axis, and a clade in which flowers mature synchronously to acropetally on an inflorescence axis. Other conspicuous morphological characters, including stipule position, inflorescence form, petal presence or absence, number of pollen colpi, carpel number, and fruit morphology, are homoplasious among and within clades at the tribal level. The results are used to propose a circumscription of the family, with 26 genera and approximately 300 species. Twenty genera are placed among six tribes (Cunonieae, Codieae, Geissoieae, Caldcluvieae, Schizomerieae, and Spiraeanthemeae), and six poorly resolved genera are not placed into any formally named group. Among outgroups, the Australian endemic family Tremandraceae is nested within Elaeocarpaceae.
S598	L. C. Hileman;M. C. Vasey;V. T. Parker	2001	Phylogeny and biogeography of the Arbutoideae (Ericaceae): Implications for the Madrean-Tethyan hypothesis	Systematic Botany	26	1	131-143	10.1043/0363-6445-26.1.131	http://www.jstor.org/stable/2666660		Phylogenetic relationships within subfamily Arbutoideae (Ericaceae) were estimated using parsimony and maximum likelihood analyses of sequence data from the ITS region and part of the large subunit of nuclear ribosomal DNA. The data support the monophyly of Arctostaphylos, Arctous, and Comarostaphylis, but suggest that Arbutus is not monophyletic, with Mediterraneart Basin species more closely related to the clade containing Arctostaphylos, Arctous, Comarostaphylis, Ornithostaphylos, and Xylococcus than to the western North American species of Arbutus. Calibration of branch lengths with the fossil record suggests that a vicariance event occurred among members of the Arbutoideae between western North America and the Mediterranean Basin at the Paleogene/Neogene boundary, consistent with the Madrean-Tethyan hypothesis.
S578	T. Kajita;H. Ohashi;Y. Tateishi;C. D. Bailey;J. J. Doyle	2001	rbcL and legume phylogeny with particular reference to Phaseoleae, Millettieae, and allies	Systematic Botany	26	3	515-536	10.1043/0363-6445-26.3.515	http://www.jstor.org/stable/3093979		A parsimony analysis was conducted on 319 rbcL sequences, comprising 242 from 194 genera of Leguminosae and 77 from other families. Results support earlier conclusions from rbcL and other molecular data that a monophyletic Leguminosae is part of a Fabales that includes Polygalaceae, Surianaceae, and the anomalous rosid genus Quillaja. Within legumes, results of previous analyses were also supported, such as the paraphyletic nature of Caesalpinioideae and monophyly of Mimosoideae and Papilionoideae. Most new data (74 sequences) were from Papilionoideae, particularly Phaseoleae, Millettieae, and allies. Although the overall topology for Papilionoideae was largely unresolved, several large clades were well-supported. The analysis contained a large sample of Phaseoleae and Millettieae, and not surprisingly showed both tribes to be polyphyletic, though with all taxa except Wisteria and allied Millettieae belonging to a single well supported clade. Within this clade was a strongly supported group that included Phaseoleae subtribes Erythrininae, Glycininae, Phaseolinae, Kennediinae, and Cajaninae, with only the last two being monophyletic. Desmodieae and Psoraleeae were also part of this clade. The monophyletic Phaseoleae subtribes Ophrestiinae and Diocleinae grouped with most Millettieae in a clade that included a group similar to the core Millettieae identified in other studies. All but one of the remaining Millettieae sampled formed an additional clade within the overall millettioid/phaseoloid group.
S757	R. T. Pennington;M. Lavin;H. Ireland;B. Klitgaard;J. Preston;J. M. Hu	2001	Phylogenetic relationships of basal papilionoid legumes based upon sequences of the chloroplast trnL intron	Systematic Botany	26	3	537-556	10.1043/0363-6445-26.3.537	http://www.jstor.org/stable/3093980		The Swartzieae, Sophoreae, Dipterygeae, and Dalbergieae are considered the most basal tribes of the subfamily Papilionoideae (Leguminosae). Nucleotide sequences from the chloroplast trnL intron for the majority of genera of these tribes were analyzed cladistically together with placeholder representatives of more derived tribes. Preliminary results indicate radical changes are necessary for papilionoid classification because Swartzieae, Sophoreae, and Dalbergieae are polyphyletic. Their constituent genera are mixed in a series of monophyletic groups, many of which have never been proposed previously, and the relationships amongst which are poorly resolved. Some of these groups, such as the genistoid and dalbergioid clades, are species-rich because they contain major papilionoid radiations. In other cases, putatively basal genera form small clades with no derived taxa included. There is weak evidence that Bobgunnia, Swartzia, Cyathostegia, Bocoa, and Ateleia (all Swartzieae) may be the sister group to all other papilionoids, and that a large clade is congruent with a 50kb inversion in the chloroplast large single copy (LSC) region.
S536	L. M. Schultheis	2001	Systematics of Downingia (Campanulaceae) based on molecular sequence data: implications for floral and chromosome evolution	Systematic Botany	26	3	603-621	10.1043/0363-6445-26.3.603	http://www.bioone.org/doi/full/10.1043/0363-6445-26.3.603		The genus Downingia (Campanulaceae) has been the subject of numerous biosystematic studies, yet little is known of the evolutionary relationships among the 13 currently recognized species. Phylogenetic analyses were undertaken in order to examine the available biosystematic data in a phylogenetic framework. The genus is of particular interest for its extensive chromosomal variation and for its distribution in relatively new, but threatened, vernal pool habitats of western North America. Parsimony analyses of molecular sequence data from the nuclear 18S–26S rDNA internal transcribed spacer region (ITS) and the chloroplast 3’ trnK intron indicate Downingia is monophyletic. Monotypic Porterella is sister to Downingia. Additional close relatives include Legenere and Howellia. Two main clades emerge within Downingia, neither of which have been previously recognized using morphological features. One of the two clades is homogenous in chromosome number (n = 11), and the other heterogenous, with chromosome numbers of n = 6, 8, 9, 10, 11, and 12. Reduced, presumably selfing floral forms appear to have arisen at least twice. “Long anther tube” floral forms appear to have arisen three times from “short anther tube” floral forms. The data suggest that the current circumscriptions of some species, notably D. yina, need further examination.
S762	M. Thulin;M. Lavin	2001	Phylogeny and biogeography of the Ormocarpum group (Fabaceae): a new genus Zygocarpum from the Horn of Africa region	Systematic Botany	26	2	299-317		http://www.jstor.org/stable/2666709		The genus Zygocarpum is described with six species formerly of Ormocarpum. This genus is endemic to the Horn of Africa, the southern end of the Arabian Peninsula, and the island of Socotra. Analysis of combined nuclear ribosomal ITS/5.8S and morphological data reveals that Zygocarpum is strongly supported as monophyletic and the basal-most lineage of a mainly African-Madagascan clade comprising also Ormocarpum, Ormocarpopsis, and Peltiera. A second analysis involving a combination of nuclear ribosomal ITS/5.8S, chloroplast trnL intron, and morphological data reveals some well supported relationships among the species of Zygocarpum. Zygocarpum dhofarense and Z. yemenese, endemic to the Arabian Peninsula, form a sister clade to the central Somalian Z. gillettii. The precise relationships among the other two Somalian species, Zygocarpum rectangulare and Z. somalense, as well as the endemic Socotran Zygocarpum coeruleum, are less certain. The distribution of Zygocarpum, which spans the Gulf of Aden, is considered to be due to a Late Tertiary vicariant event involving the separation of the Arabian Peninsula from continental Africa.
S635	C. D. Bailey;R. A. Price;J. J. Doyle	2002	Systematics of the halimolobine Brassicaceae: evidence from three loci and morphology	Systematic Botany	27	2	318-332	10.1043/0363-6445-27.2.318	http://www.jstor.org/stable/3093874		Relationships among Halimolobos, Mancoa, Pennellia, and Sphaerocardamum have been controversial. Higher level studies, using cpDNA data from the chloroplast encoded ndhF and trnL intron, suggested that some species of these genera represent a monophyletic group: the halimolobine clade. The research presented here focuses on the halimolobine clade with denser intra and inter-specific sampling. The primary aims of the project were: (1) to further test the monophyly of the halimolobine clade; (2) to test the monophyly Halimolobos, Mancoa, Pennellia, and Sphaerocardamum; and (3) to study the evolution of morphological characters in the clade. Data were generated from the trnL-F region, nrDNA ITS, pistillata intron one, and 17 non-molecular characters. The difficulties associated with incorporating these data into simultaneous analyses are discussed and a strategy is presented. Separate and simultaneous analysis confirmed a monophyletic core group of halimolobine species. The strict consensus tree contained five well-supported halimolobine subclades: Sphaerocardamum, Pennellia plus Arabis tricornuta, Mancoa bracteata plus M. foliosa, a narrowly defined Halimolobos, and a clade consisting of a subset of Halimolobos and Mancoa species. Individual morphological characters vary in their utility for classification of the group. However, the majority of the characters provide some grouping information within the halimolobine clade.
S835	S. B. Farmer;E. E. Schilling	2002	Phylogenetic analyses of Trilliaceae based on morphological and molecular data	Systematic Botany	27	4	674-692	10.1043/0363-6445-27.4.674	http://www.jstor.org/stable/3093915		These comprehensive analyses of systematic relationships within Trilliaceae focused on the relationships within Paris sensu lato (i.e., Paris, Daiswa, and Kinugasa); between species of Trillium; and between Paris sensu lato and Trillium. Seventy species were selected for cladistic analyses and scored for 110 morphological characters; matK and ITS molecular characters were obtained from GenBank for a subset of 26 taxa. Based on the preliminary results, Trillium rivale was used as a functional outgroup. For the subset of 26 species, analysis of the combined ITS and matK sequence data produced six shortest trees; the morphological data, 13 shortest trees; and the combined morphological and molecular data sets, three trees. Analyses of the full morphological data set of 70 species produced 76 shortest trees. Trillium rivale was distinct from both Paris and Trillium and should be placed in its own genus, for which the name Pseudotrillium is proposed. Trillium govanianum was more closely related to Paris than to Trillium but should be retained as a monotypic genus, Trillidium. Trillium and Paris were monophyletic based on molecular as well as morphological evidence. The cladistic analyses strongly support the separation of Paris sensu lato into Daiswa, Kinugasa, and Paris. The monophyly of Trillium after removal of Pseudotrillium and Trillidium was supported in all but the large morphological analysis; subgenus Phyllantherum was monophyletic in all cases, but subgenus Trillium was not monophyletic.
S881	G. B. J. Grob;B. Gravendeel;M. C. M. Eurlings;W. L. A. Hetterscheid	2002	Phylogeny of the Tribe Thomsonieae (Araceae) Based on Chloroplast matK and trnL Intron Sequences	Systematic Botany	27	3	453-467	10.1043/0363-6445-27.3.453	http://www.jstor.org/stable/3093954		The tribe Thomsonieae (Araceae) comprise two genera of palaeotropical herbs: Amorphophallus with approximately 200 species and Pseudodracontium with seven species. A phylogenetic study of the Thomsonieae is presented. Nucleotide sequences of the chloroplast gene matK and the trnL intron were analyzed for 46 Amorphophallus species, two Pseudodracontium species and six outgroups using maximum parsimony. The two data sets were analyzed separately and in combination. Amorphophallus can be divided into five major well-supported clades, which provide new hypotheses on infrageneric relationships. The branches connecting these clades, however, are poorly supported. Results are compared with previous morphology-based divisions of Amorphophallus. Remarkable results from this study are the monophyly of the African Amorphophallus species and the nesting of Pseudodracontium within Amorphophallus, making Amorphophallus in the traditional sense paraphyletic to Pseudodracontium.
S760	M. M. Hu;M. Lavin;M. F. Wojciechowski;M. J. Sanderson	2002	Phylogenetic analysis of nuclear ribosomal ITS/5.8 S sequences in the tribe Millettieae (Fabaceae): Poecilanthe-Cyclolobium, the core Millettieae, and the Callerya group	Systematic Botany	27	4	722-733	10.1043/0363-6445-27.4.722	http://www.jstor.org/stable/3093918		The taxonomic composition of three principal and distantly related groups of the former tribe Millettieae, which were first identified from nuclear phytochrome and chloroplast trnK/matK sequences, was more extensively investigated with a phylogenetic analysis of nuclear ribosomal DNA ITS/5.8S sequences. The first of these groups includes the neotropical genera Poecilanthe and Cyclolobium, which are resolved as basal lineages in a clade that otherwise includes the neotropical genera Brongniartia and Harpalyce and the Australian Templetonia and Hovea. The second group includes the large millettioid genera, Millettia, Lonchocarpus, Derris, and Tephrosia, which are referred to as the "core Millettieae" group. Phylogenetic analysis of nuclear ribosomal DNA ITS/5.8S sequences reveals that Millettia is polyphyletic, and that subclades of the core Millettieae group, such as the New World Lonchocarpus or the pantropical Tephrosia and segregate genera (e.g., Chadsia and Mundulea), each form well supported monophyletic subgroups. The third lineage includes the genera Afgekia, Callerya, and Wisteria. These genera are resolved as a basal subclade in the inverted-repeat-lacking clade, which is a large legume group that includes the many well known temperate and herbaceous legumes, such as Astragalus, Medicago and Pisum, but not any other Millettieae.
S813	M. Lavin;M. F. Wojciechowski;P. Gasson;C. E. Hughes;E. Wheeler	2002	Phylogeny of robinioid legumes (Fabaceae) revisited: Coursetia and Gliricidia recircumscribed, and a biogeographical appraisal of the Caribbean endemics	Systematic Botany	28	2	387-409	10.1043/0363-6445-28.2.387	http://www.jstor.org/stable/3094008		Morphological data and sequences from the nuclear ribosomal ITS region, and the chloroplast trnL intron and matK locus were sampled from robinioid legumes to infer phylogenetic relationships. The monophyletic robinioid clade includes 11 genetically and often morphologically distinct subclades ranked as genera with the following well supported higher level relationships: ((Hebestigma, Lennea), ((Gliricidia, Poitea), (Olneya, Robinia, Poissonia, Coursetia, Peteria, Genistidium, and Sphinctospermum))). In order to render all 11 robinioid genera monophyletic, the genus Hybosema is synonymized with Gliricidia, and the genus Poissonia is resurrected to accommodate four morphologically disparate species previously classified in Coursetia. Three new combinations are required to accommodate these two generic recircumscriptions: Gliricidia robustum, Poissonia heterantha, and Poissonia weberbaueri. Ages of clades and evolutionary substitution rates are derived from a rate-smoothed Bayesian likelihood approach on sequences from the ITS region and the matK locus. Time constraints are derived from the Tertiary fossil wood species Robinia zirkelii , which shares apomorphic wood characters with the Robinia stem clade. The Cuban endemic Hebestigma is estimated to have diverged at least 38 Ma from its Mesoamerican sister genus Lennea, whereas the Greater Antillean Poitea is estimated to have diverged at least 16 Ma from its continental sister Gliricidia. This study reveals that sequences from the ITS region are amenable to exhaustive taxon sampling because of the high levels of variation at and below the species level. The evolutionary substitution rate for the ITS region is estimated at 3.1-3.5 x 10-9 substitutions/site/year, approximately an order of magnitude faster than that estimated for the matK locus.
S703	S. Liede;A. Täuber	2002	Circumscription of the genus Cynanchum (Apocynaceae - Asclepiadoideae)	Systematic Botany	27	4	789-800	10.1043/0363-6445-27.4.789	http://www.jstor.org/stable/3093924		Analysis of the trnT-trnL spacer, the trnL intron and the trnL-trnF spacer of 65 species of Cynanchum, 33 members of the Metastelminae, and seven representatives of other Asclepiadeae shows that Cynanchum in its present circumscription is polyphyletic. Both the genus Cynanchum and the subtribe Metastelminae s.l. split along the Old World-New World geographic division. The only exception to this division is Cynanchum subgenus Mellichampia, which belongs to Cynanchum s. str. For the Old World Cynanchum relatives, the subtribe Cynanchinae is re-established. The remaining New World sections of Cynanchum are not monophyletic. The South American members of section Cynanchum join the morphologically aberrant Grisebachiella hieronymi. Section Macbridea is associated with Funastrum. In the Old World, the succulent genera Folotsia, Karimbolea, Platykeleba, and Sarcostemma are monophyletic with stem-succulent Cynanchum and nested within a clade of exclusively Malagasy Cynanchum species.
S654	M. E. Olson	2002	Combining data from DNA sequences and morphology for a phylogeny of Moringaceae (Brassicales)	Systematic Botany	27	1	55-73	10.1043/0363-6445-27.1.55	http://www.jstor.org/stable/3093895		The Old World dry tropical family Moringaceae is remarkable for the great diversity of habit and floral morphology found within its only genus, Moringa. To infer the phylogenetic relationships of all 13 species, parsimony analyses of morphological data and DNA sequences from a low-copy nuclear region (PEPC), a chloroplast region (trnG), and a tandemly-repeated nuclear region present in high copy number (ITS) were conducted of each data set separately and combined. Characters from studies of ontogeny substantially enhanced the resolution of the morphological data set. The Incongruence Length Difference test indicated the congruence of all data sets, as did Templeton tests comparing the single tree resulting from the combined analysis in the context of the individual data sets. This tree is presented as the preferred topology, in which the four bottle trees appear in a basal paraphyletic assemblage, with the three species of slender trees (including the economically important M. oleifera) forming a clade that is sister to a clade of the six species of tuberous shrubs and trees of northeast Africa. Moringa is currently divided into three sections, but because of the basal grade, it cannot be divided into useful monophyletic infrageneric taxa. The phylogeny-based informal terms "bottle tree grade", "slender tree clade", and "tuberous clade" are suggested as alternatives. Relationships within Moringa were found to be largely congruent with a previous study of wood anatomy.
S642	P. Torrecilla;P. Catalán	2002	Phylogeny of broad-leaved and fine-leaved Festuca lineages (Poaceae) based on nuclear ITS sequences	Systematic Botany	27	2	241-251	10.1043/0363-6445-26.2.299	http://www.jstor.org/stable/3093868		This work presents a reconstruction of the phylogenetic relationships between ten lineages of fescues based on the analysis of nuclear rDNA ITS sequences. Thirty two representatives of most native Western Mediterranean subgenera and sections of Festuca s.l. have been included in this survey in order to establish the evolutionary links between known groups of fescues (subg. Schedonorus, subg. Festuca sect. Festuca and sect. Aulaxyper) and other related Festuca groups that have been poorly studied or that are analyzed here for the first time (subg. Drymanthele, subg. Festuca sect. Subbulbosae, sect. Eskia, sect. Pseudatropis, sect. Scariosae, sect. Pseudoscariosa). Phylogenetic analysis identified two different clades, the “broad-leaved” Festuca and the “fine-leaved” Festuca, using Dactylis, Poa, Deschampsia, Secale, and Brachypodium as outgroups. The “broad-leaved” Festuca clade shows the consecutive sister divergence of the groups: i) the Subbulbosae pro parte clade (some Festuca paniculata s.l. taxa); ii) the Hesperochloa clade (Festuca kingii); iii) the “mixed” clade (incl. sect. Subbulbosae p.p., subg. Drymanthele, sect. Scariosae, and sect. Pseudoscariosa); and iv) the Schedonorus/Lolium clade, subdivided into the “Maghrebian” subclade and the “European + Lolium” subclade. The “fine-leaved” Festuca clade is formed by a paraphyletic assemblage of sectional groups, where sects. Eskia and Pseudatropis are basal to sects. Festuca-Aulaxyper + Vulpia. The closer affinities of Lolium to the European Schedonorus and of Vulpia to Festuca sect. Aulaxyper (”Festuca rubra complex”), stated by previous authors, is confirmed in our analysis. A new nomenclatural combination is proposed (Festuca arundinacea Schreb. subsp. arundinacea var. letourneuxiana (St.-Yves) Torrecilla et Catalán comb. nov.).
S898	G. A. Allen;D. E. Soltis;P. S. Soltis	2003	Phylogeny and biogeography of Erythronium (Liliaceae) inferred from chloroplast matK and nuclear rDNA ITS sequences	Systematic Botany	28	3	512-523	10.1043/02-18.1	http://www.jstor.org/stable/25063892		We investigated phylogenetic relationships within Erythronium using DNA sequences from the chloroplast gene matK and the internal transcribed spacer (ITS) of nuclear ribosomal DNA. Erythronium, Amana, and Tulipa form a strongly supported clade that appears to be of Asian origin. Erythronium is widely distributed in the Northern Hemisphere, and consists of three well supported and geographically distinct clades occurring in western North America, eastern North America, and Eurasia. ITS analyses suggest that the Eurasian and eastern North American clades form a monophyletic group that separated into two lineages following divergence from the western North American clade. Although the three clades are each characterized by distinct morphological features, convergence both among and within geographic areas is seen in several characters. The western North American clade exhibits greater morphological and molecular diversity than either of the other two clades, and many of its species hybridize, suggesting both recent and ongoing speciation. The geographic distribution of Erythronium suggests initial diversification in Tertiary mixed mesophytic forest, followed by fragmentation of the range during the late Tertiary or early Pleistocene and subsequent radiation in western North America.
S900	S. Arias;T. Terrazas;K. Cameron	2003	Phylogenetic analysis of Pachycereus (Cactaceae, Pachycereeae) based on chloroplast and nuclear DNA sequences	Systematic Botany	28	3	547-557	10.1043/02-17.1			The phylogenetic relationships of Pachycereus (Cactaceae) species and relatives from subtribe Pachycereinae were studied using DNA sequence data. The plastid rpl16 intron, trnL intron, trnL-F intergenic spacer, and nuclear rDNA internal transcribed spacer region (ITS) were sequenced for 30 species, representing the four genera of subtribe Pachycereinae (Carnegiea, Cephalocereus, Neobuxbaumia, and Pachycereus) as well as three additional outgroup genera from subtribe Stenocereinae. Phylogenetic analyses support neither the monophyly of Pachycereus as currently circumscribed nor Pachycereinae unless Stenocereus aragonii and S. eichlamii are included within it. However, these results suggest that the subtribe can be divided into three major clades. The first includes Pachycereus hollianus together with P. lepidanthus, which is sister to a large clade combining species from Pachycereus and Cephalocereus group. Within the large clade Cephalocereus and Neobuxbaumia together with Pachycereus fulviceps are sister to the remaining species of Pachycereus as well as Stenocereus aragonii, S. eichlamii, and Carnegiea gigantea. Moreover results suggest that Pachycereus is monophyletic with five species and that several other genera (Backebergia, Lemaireocereus, Lophocereus, and Pseudomitrocereus) may be resurrected. A number of morphological and anatomical characters support these relationships, indicating that future analyses combining both molecular and morphological characters will be particularly useful in resolving relationships within this group of columnar cacti.
S901	M. A. Beilstein;M. D. Windham	2003	A Phylogenetic Analysis of Western North American Draba (Brassicaceae) Based on Nuclear Ribosomal DNA Sequences from the ITS Region	Systematic Botany	28	3	584-592	10.1043/02-37.1	http://www.jstor.org/stable/25063898		To clarify relationships among North American members of the genus Draba, we produced a molecular phylogeny using nucleotide sequences from both internal transcribed spacers of nuclear ribosomal DNA and the 5.8S rRNA gene (collectively, ITS). Sequence data from 17 Draba taxa and three outgroups were subjected to both parsimony and maximum likelihood analyses. The resulting phylogenetic framework is used to test the validity of proposed infrageneric classifications for North American Draba, and examine the taxonomic value of flower color, chromosome base number, and growth habit.
S907	L. Bohs	2004	A chloroplast DNA phylogeny of Solanum section Lasiocarpa	Systematic Botany	29	1	177-187	10.1600/036364404772974310			Solanum section Lasiocarpa includes about a dozen species with a center of diversity in the New World tropics. Solanum lasiocarpum and S. repandum (sometimes considered to be conspecific as S. ferox) have an Old World distribution in Asia and the Pacific Islands. Several species in this section produce edible fruits, and two, the lulo or naranjilla (S. quitoense) and the cocona (S. sessiliflorum) are cultivated commercially. Phylogenetic relationships in Solanum section Lasiocarpa were investigated using sequence data from the chloroplast trnT-trnL spacer, the trnL-trnF spacer, and the trnL gene, including the trnL intron. Sampling included 24 accessions from section Lasiocarpa and 14 accesssions of other Solanum species as outgroups. All species considered to belong to section Lasiocarpa by previous authors were examined with the exception of the recently described S. atheniae. Solanum robustum and S. stagnale, sometimes considered to belong to section Lasiocarpa, are excluded from the group on the basis of the trn data. The remaining species in the section form a monophyletic group, with three well-supported clades within it: S. hirtum, S. pectinatum-sessiliflorum-stramonifolium, and the remainder of the species in the section. Sequences of S. lasiocarpum and S. repandum are extremely similar, and these two Asian taxa cluster with the New World S. candidum and S. pseudolulo on the trn trees.
S940	C. J. Cox;B. Goffinet;A. J. Shaw;S. B. Boles	2003	Phylogenetic relationships among the mosses based on heterogeneous Bayesian analysis of multiple genes from multiple genomic compartments	Systematic Botany	29	2	234-250	10.1600/036364404774195458			Nucleotide sequences from eight nuclear, chloroplast, and mitochondrial genes were obtained from 30 mosses (plus four outgroup liverworts) in order to resolve phylogenetic relationships among the major clades of division Bryophyta. Phylogenetic analyses were conducted using maximum parsimony, maximum likelihood (ML), and Bayesian inference. Inferences were compared from Bayesian analyses using homogeneous and several heterogeneous models. Estimates of clade confidence were based on bootstrap analyses, posterior probabilities (in Bayesian analyses) and novel combined approaches. Most ingroup relationships were congruent among analyses, but support for individual clades depended on the analytical approach. Increasingly parameterized models of nucleotide substitution in the likelihood analyses provided significantly higher goodness-of-fit to the data. The results suggest that 1) the Bryophyta, including Sphagnum and Takakia, are monophyletic, 2) Andreaea and Andreaeobryum form a monophyletic group, 3) Oedipodium griffithianum is sister to all other operculate taxa, 4) mosses with nematodontous peristomes are paraphyletic and basal to arthrodontous mosses, 5) Diphyscium is sister to all other arthrodontous mosses, 6) Encalypta is sister to the Funariaceae, and 6) mosses with diplolepideous-alternate peristomes form a monophyletic group. Implications of the phylogenetic hypothesis for morphological evolution in mosses include 1) a pseudopodium has arisen independently in Sphagnum and Andreaea, 2) the mucilage hairs of Andreaeobryum and Takakia are non-homologous, 3) the stomata found in Sphagnum are not homologous to those of other mosses, and 4) that stomata were absent in the ancestor of all mosses.
S875	M. D. Crisp;L. G. Cook	2003	Molecular Evidence for Definition of Genera in the Oxylobium Group (Fabaceae: Mirbelieae)	Systematic Botany	28	4	705-713	10.1043/02-69.1			The circumscription of Oxylobium and related genera has been problematic for nearly 200 years. Traditional definitions of genera in the group have relied on morphological features of the leaves, flower, and fruit that overlap extensively between genera. Therefore sequences of cpDNA (trnL-F intron and spacer) and nrDNA (ITS) were used to estimate the phylogeny of the group in an attempt to redefine the genera as monophyletic groups. Oxylobium sens. str. was found to be a well supported clade in both data sets, with the inclusion of Mirbelia oxylobioides. No other genus in the group was supported by these data, except Gastrolobium sens. lat. Some species groups within Chorizema, Mirbelia, and Podolobium were supported but relationships among these, Oxylobium and Gastrolobium differed significantly between the chloroplast and nuclear data sets. No group supported by the molecular data had a morphological synapomorphy, not even Oxylobium or Gastrolobium. Therefore it may be necessary to adopt a much broader generic concept in this group than has been done previously. Incongruence between the two molecular data sets, and very short internal basal branches in both, suggest a rapid early radiation in this group, possibly combined with hybridization and lineage sorting.
S890	S. L. Datwyler;A. D. Wolfe	2004	Phylogenetic relationships and morphological evolution in Penstemon subg. Dasanthera (Veronicaceae)	Systematic Botany	29	1	165-176	10.1600/036364404772974077			Penstemon subgenus Dasanthera is a group of nine species distributed at high elevations in western North America. Hybridization is common in the subgenus when two or more species occur in sympatry. We examined evolutionary trends and the importance of hybridization to the evolution in the subgenus. Phylogenetic and biogeographic patterns among members of Penstemon subgenus Dasanthera were assessed using nuclear ribosomal ITS and chloroplast matK sequence data, and inter-simple sequence repeat (ISSR) markers. These data support previous hypotheses suggesting that the Cascade-Sierra Nevada lineage is derived from the northern Rocky Mountain lineage. Furthermore, there is a shift in growth form from suffructescent perennials to evergreen subshrubs concurrent with migration to the Cascade-Sierra Nevada mountains. Within the Cascade-Sierra lineage, P. newberryi and P. rupicola exhibit floral characters that may represent adaptations for hummingbird pollination. The ISSR data demonstrate the utility of dominant markers for reconstructing phylogenetic relationships at the interspecific level.
S895	J. J. Doyle;J. L. Doyle;C. Harbison	2003	Chloroplast-expressed glutamine synthetase in Glycine and related Leguminosae: phylogeny, gene duplication, and ancient polyploidy	Systematic Botany	28	3	567-577	10.1043/02-31.1			The nuclear gene encoding the chloroplast-expressed isozyme of glutamine synthetase (ncpGS) is single copy in diploid angiosperms but is duplicated in species of Glycine, a paleopolyploid genus. The two Glycine paralogues are sister to one another in phylogenetic analyses, a pattern that suggests that this ncpGS duplication occurred subsequent to the divergence of Glycine from extant Glycininae. This pattern does not support an allopolyploid hypothesis in which genomes from close relatives of extant genera combined to form the polyploid, 2n = 40 genome of Glycine, nor with an ancient gene duplication shared with other Glycininae. Rather, it is consistent with autopolyploidy or with a simple gene duplication. Teramnus ncpGS was the closest relative of the two Glycine paralogues, supporting a sister-group relationship between these two genera. In contrast, ncpGS results suggested that Sinodolichos, a genus that has been suggested as a possible congener of Glycine, is more closely related to Pseueminia and Pseudovigna. Both paralogues of ncpGS identify known genome groups among species of Glycine subg. Glycine, but neither strongly resolves relationships among these groups. Incongruence between the two paralogues in the placement of G. falcata mirrors incongruence between the chloroplast genome and other nuclear genes for this species.
S1045	P. W. Fritsch	2003	Multiple geographic origins of Antillean Styrax	Systematic Botany	28	2	421-430	10.1043/0363-6445-28.2.421			The phylogenetic relationships within Styrax series Valvatae were estimated with DNA sequence data from the internal transcribed spacer region of nuclear ribosomal DNA to test hypotheses bearing on the historical biogeography of the Antilles. The results provide evidence for three dispersal events within Styrax to the Antilles, one from southern North America, the other two from South America. The data do not support a strict Greater Antillean vicariance scenario for Styrax. Vicariance between the Greater Antilles and southern North America without immediate prior dispersal would require a more basal position of Styrax ochraceus than that recovered, although low branch support values in the relevant portion of the tree do not preclude this possibility. Dispersal of Styrax from South America to the Greater Antilles could have proceeded across oceanic barriers, or more likely through GAARlandia. Styrax obtusifolius in Cuba and HispaÒiola and the strictly South American Foveolaria clade have evolved small flowers and the gynodioecious condition independently. The predominance of microscopic pollinators in the Cuban fauna may have impelled the evolution of small flowers in Styrax obtusifolius. The data suggest that the Antilles have played little if any role in the intercontinental dispersal of Styrax.
S899	V. F. García;R. G. Olmstead	2003	Phylogenetics of tribe Anthocercideae (Solanaceae) based on ndhF and trnL/F sequence data	Systematic Botany	28	3	609-615	10.1043/02-52.1			Tribe Anthocercideae (Solanaceae) is an Australian endemic group comprising 31 species in seven genera. Recent phylogenetic work has placed the Anthocercideae sister to Nicotiana. Two chloroplast DNA regions, ndhF and trnL/F, were analyzed and the phylogeny was used to test the tribe's monophyly, discover relationships within the tribe, and make inferences on character evolution and biogeography. The relationship between Nicotiana, Symonanthus, and the rest of tribe Anthocercideae is unresolved. Anthocercis, Anthotroche, Grammosolen, and Symonanthus are found to be monophyletic, while Cyphanthera and Duboisia are not (Crenidium is monotypic). Several characters were inferred to be derived within the Anthocercideae, including unilocular stamens with semicircular slits, ebractiolate flowers, and baccate fruits. Ancient colonization occurred in southwestern Australia followed by several radiation events eastward.
S953	D. S. Gernandt;A. Liston;D. Piñero	2003	Phylogenetics of Pinus Subsections Cembroides and Nelsoniae Inferred from cpDNA Sequences	Systematic Botany	28	4	657-673	10.1043/02-63.1			We sequenced chloroplast DNA from the matK, rbcL, and rpl16 regions to infer interrelationships within the pinyon pines (Pinus subsections Cembroides and Nelsoniae). Pinyons, together with subsections Balfourianae, Gerardianae, and Krempfianae have been classified in section Parrya, characterized by a dorsal umbo (raised area) on the ovulate cone scale. All three cpDNA regions support the separation of pinyon pines into subsection Cembroides and a monotypic subsection Nelsoniae and indicate that section Parrya is paraphyletic. We propose restricting section Parrya to the North American clade (subsections Cembroides, Nelsoniae, and Balfourianae) and transferring the Asian subsections Gerardianae and Krempfianae to section Quinquefolius (generally know as section Strobus). The data moderately support a sister relationship between subsections Nelsoniae and Balfourianae, rendering the pinyons paraphyletic. Several monophyletic groups can be identified within subsection Cembroides, including a sister relationship between P. maximartinezii and P. pinceana, which is at variance with morphological cladistic analyses. In general, relationships inferred from cpDNA are less consistent with morphological evidence than with internal transcribed spacer region data, despite paralogy in the latter marker.
S945	C. E. Hughes;G. P. Lewis;A. Daza Y;C. Reynel	2004	Maraniona, a new dalbergioid legume genus (Leguminosae, Papilionoideae) from Peru	Systematic Botany	29	2	366-374	10.1600/036364404774195557			A new Papilionoid legume genus, Maraniona is described based on recent collections from the MaraÒon Valley in northern Peru. The sister group relationships of Maraniona are analysed using a combination of non-molecular and chloroplast DNA matK/trnK sequence data that incorporate comprehensive generic level sampling across the dalbergioid legumes. This analysis places Maraniona in a strongly supported subclade of the informal Pterocarpus clade of the dalbergioid legumes. We discuss the endemic status of Maraniona in relation to overall endemism in the upper MaraÒon Valley as well as the possible affinities of Maraniona to the genus Tipuana from Argentina / Bolivia.
S943	J. A. Koontz;P. S. Soltis;D. E. Soltis	2004	Using phylogeny reconstruction to test hypotheses of hybrid origin in Delphinium section Diedropetala	Systematic Botany	29	2	345-357	10.1600/036364404774195539			One-hundred ITS rDNA and 32 trnL-F cpDNA sequences were used to reconstruct the phylogeny of 62 (of 67) species of Delphinium section Diedropetala to test the hypothesized hybrid origins of Delphinium gypsophilum and D. luteum. Delphinium gypsophilum has been proposed to be a hybrid derivative of D. recurvatum and D. hesperium subsp. pallescens; D. luteum is of putative hybrid origin between D. decorum and D. nudicaule. The nuclear and chloroplast sequence data were analyzed separately and, because there was no conflict, in combination. TrnL-F alone did not provide much resolution. The ITS data set and the combined ITS/trnL-F data set resolved several small clades. Delphinium luteum appears in a clade with both of its putative parents, and D. gypsophilum appears in a clade with D. recurvatum. In both cases, the sequence data are consistent with hybrid origin, but are also consistent with the putative hybrids being closely related to one or both of their proposed progenitors. Population-level data (allozymes, RAPDs, and AFLPs) support the latter hypothesis. Although our goal was not to resolve all relationships throughout sect. Diedropetala, the results provide initial information on subsectional relationships.
S896	J. Lee;B. G. Baldwin;L. D. Gottlieb	2003	Phylogenetic relationships among the primarily North American genera of Cichorieae (Compositae) based on analysis of 18S-26S nuclear rDNA ITS and ETS sequences	Systematic Botany	28	3	616-626	10.1043/02-44.1			Phylogenetic analyses of internal transcribed spacer (ITS), external transcribed spacer (ETS), and 5.8S gene sequences of 18S-26S nuclear rDNA from all 23 genera of Cichorieae with centers of diversity in North America (and Picrosia from South America) show that all but three of the genera (Glyptopleura, Krigia, and Phalacroseris) belong to a series of seven clades that are well supported by bootstrap values >90%. Phalacroseris, endemic to California, with a single species (P. bolanderi), is sister to a well-supported (>95% bootstrap) clade that includes all other principally North American genera (plus Picrosia). The seven clades with major support and their component genera are: 1) the Lygodesmia Clade: Chaetadelpha, Lygodesmia, and Shinnersoseris; 2) the Pinaropappus Clade: Marshalljohnstonia and Pinaropappus; 3) the Pyrrhopappus Clade: Picrosia and Pyrrhopappus; 4) the Microseris Clade: Agoseris, Microseris, Nothocalais, Stebbinsoseris, and Uropappus; 5) the Stephanomeria Clade: Munzothamnus, Pleiacanthus, Prenanthella, Rafinesquia, and Stephanomeria; 6) the Malacothrix 1 Clade: Atrichoseris and various species of Malacothrix; and 7) the Malacothrix 2 Clade: Anisocoma, Calycoseris, and various other species of Malacothrix. The rDNA sequence data provide < 80% bootstrap support for larger groups that combine two or more of the seven major clades, except for one uniting all 24 ingroup genera and one uniting the Lygodesmia Clade and Pyrrhopappus Clade. The present analysis shows that Malacothrix, a genus of 22 species, is not monophyletic. None of the clades corresponds precisely to a suprageneric taxon of Cichorieae proposed previously, although taxa constituting each clade belong to a common subtribe or subgroup in classifications by Bremer, Jeffrey, and Stebbins, with two to three exceptions. As a group, the 24 genera represent a single, major radiation of Cichorieae based in North America.
S941	R. A. Levin;W. L. Wagner;P. C. Hoch;W. J. Hahn;A. Rodriguez;D. A. Baum;L. Katinas;E. A. Zimmer;K. J. Sytsma	2003	Paraphyly in tribe Onagreae: Insights into phylogenetic relationships of Onagraceae based on nuclear and chloroplast sequence data	Systematic Botany	29	1	147-164	10.1600/036364404772974293			Onagraceae are a family of 17 genera in seven tribes, with the majority of species in tribes Onagreae and Epilobieae. Despite the species-richness of these two tribes, to date no phylogenetic study has been done with sufficient taxon sampling to examine relationships between and within these tribes. In this study, we used DNA sequence data from one nuclear region (ITS) and two chloroplast regions (trnL-trnF and rps16) to infer phylogenetic relationships among 93 taxa across the family, with concentrated sampling in the large tribe Onagreae. Results strongly suggest that tribe Gongylocarpeae is sister to tribes Epilobieae + Onagreae, both of which are monophyletic. Within Onagreae, Camissonia seems to be broadly paraphyletic, and Oenothera is also paraphyletic. In Oenothera there appear to be two lineages, one of which has Gaura + Stenosiphon nested within it. At the base of the Onagraceae phylogeny, we have clarified previous confusion regarding conflicting placements of Hauya and Lopezia based on nuclear versus chloroplast data. Results of these analyses are supported by morphology and suggest the need for new taxonomic delimitations, which are forthcoming.
S906	M. A. McPherson;M. F. Fay;M. W. Chase;S. W. Graham	2003	Parallel loss of a slowly evolving intron from two closely related families of Asparagales	Systematic Botany	29	2	296-307	10.1600/036364404774195494			Convergent intron loss in the plastid genome has been reported at a broad phylogenetic level in the flowering plants, but no cases are known among closely related taxa, aside from those with a propensity for genome rearrangement. We performed a large survey of a plastid intron in the 3'-rps12 locus and found that it is present in all monocots sampled, apart from two closely related families, Asphodelaceae and Hemerocallidaceae, in the order Asparagales. However, only a subset of taxa in the latter family lack it. A likelihood-based parametric bootstrapping analysis rejects an hypothesis that intron loss is a marker for the monophyly of all the taxa lacking it. Reconstructions of evolutionary transformation in intron status (presence vs. absence) using an equal weighting scheme (standard parsimony) on optimal and plausible suboptimal trees instead yield two major classes of ancestral-state assignment. These scenarios indicate that introns were either lost in parallel, or there was a single loss and a subsequent secondary origin. Parsimony weighting schemes that are skewed but (arguably) more realistic than equal weighting reject the latter reconstruction and support an hypothesis that intron loss is not homologous in Asphodelaceae and Hemerocallidaceae. One of the parallel losses supports a recent circumscription of Hemerocallidaceae to incorporate the family Johnsoniaceae.
S922	J. T. Miller;J. W. Grimes;D. J. Murphy;R. J. Bayer;P. Y. Ladiges	2003	A Phylogentic Analysis of the Acacieae and Ingeae (Mimosoideae: Fabaceae) based on trnK, matK psbA-trnH and trnL/F Seqeunce Data	Systematic Botany	28	3	558-566	10.1043/02-48.1			A phylogenetic analysis of exemplars of Acacieae, Ingeae, and some Mimoseae, based on trnK, matK, psbA-trnH, and trnL/trnF sequence data, is presented. The results support other recent studies in showing that neither the Ingeae nor Acacieae is monophyletic. Some subgenera of Acacia, specifically subgenera Acacia and Phyllodineae, are monophyletic, but subg. Acacia is in a basal polychotomy with various members of Mimoseae and a large clade with the other members of Ingeae and Acacieae. Acacia subg. Phyllodineae is sister group to members of the Ingeae. Both the Ingeae and Acacia subg. Aculeiferum are paraphyletic.
S897	T. Nakazato;G. J. Gastony	2003	Molecular phylogenetics of Anogramma species and related genera (Pteridaceae: Taenitidoideae)	Systematic Botany	28	3	490-502	10.1043/02-40.1			Anogramma is a genus of eight putative species with small annual sporophytes and potentially perennating gametophytes. Phylogenetic relationships within the genus as well as its relationships with other putatively taenitidoid genera and with traditionally cheilanthoid Cosentinia vellea have been poorly resolved and are investigated here. Maximum parsimony, maximum likelihood, and Bayesian inference analyses of rbcL sequences were used to test 1) the monophyly of Anogramma, 2) support for the proposed specific distinctness of A. guatemalensis and A. caespitosa from A. leptophylla, and 3) the asserted close (sister) relationship between Anogramma and Pityrogramma, as well as to infer the phylogenetic relationships among these genera. Results reveal that Anogramma in the traditional sense is polyphyletic. Anogramma guatemalensis and A. caespitosa nest within A. leptophylla. Pityrogramma is not sister to Anogramma as a whole but only to A. chaerophylla and A. novogaliciana. Anogramma osteniana is deeply separated from its traditional congeners and the new combination Jamesonia osteniana (Dutra) Gastony is made. Cosentinia vellea should not be subsumed within Cheilanthes but instead should be considered a taenitidoid genus closely related to A. leptophylla and A. lorentzii. Neighbor joining analysis of Amplified Fragment Length Polymorphism data sets inferred relationships among the A. leptophylla accessions, embedding A. guatemalensis and A. caespitosa in respective New World and Old World clades of A. leptophylla.
S871	N. Pedersen;C. J. Cox;L. Hedens	2003	Phylogeny of the moss family Bryaceae inferred from chloroplast DNA sequences and morphology	Systematic Botany							Phylogenetic relationships within the moss family Bryaceae were studied using chloroplast DNA sequences (atpB-rbcL, rpl16, rps4, and trnL-trnF region) and anatomical and morphological data. Phylogenetic analyses using maximum parsimony, maximum likelihood, and Bayesian methods indicate that the genera Brachymenium, Bryum, and Rhodobryum are not monophyletic. A clade including Acidodontium, Anomobryum, Brachymenium acuminatum, Bryum species, Haplodontium, Mielichhoferia himalayana, and Plagiobryum is robustly supported in all analyses. The sections Brachymenium, Globosa, and Leptostomopsis of Brachymenium occur in a basal grade also including Bryum billarderi and Rhodobryum. The total evidence analysis supports Acidodontium as a monophyletic genus, whereas the maximum likelihood and Bayesian analyses suggest a polyphyletic Acidodontium. Features of the reduced peristome are homoplastic within the Bryaceae, and it is obvious that circumscriptions of taxa based on sporophytic characters alone may unite taxa that are distantly related. The rosulate growth condition is homoplastic within the family, which suggests that the genus Rosulabryum is not monophyletic. Based on present phylogenetic evidence, no morphological synapomorphies can be detected for the Bryaceae.
S989	P. B. Pelser;K. van den Hof;B. Gravendeel;R. van der Meijden	2003	The systematic value of morphological characters in Senecio sect. Jacobaea (Asteraceae) as compared to DNA sequences	Systematic Botany							The systematic value of morphological characters in Senecio sect. Jacobaea (Asteraceae) is studied using separate and combined parsimony analyses of morphological and DNA sequence data. These analyses are the first studies of morphological characters in a phylogenetic context in Senecio. Although the morphological data set forms a valuable addition to DNA sequences in providing greater resolution and support for several molecular based clades, most characters are not suitable for identifying clades containing more than just a few closely related species. One of these characters, the stigmatic configuration, commonly used to study generic and subtribal limits of Senecioneae, is too variable for classification purposes in sect. Jacobaea. Among the four morphological characters that can be used to identify relatively large clades in the section are two indument characters. Because indument characters also have been found to be phylogenetically informative in other sections and genera in Senecioneae, we argue that they might be suitable for classification purposes throughout this tribe. We show that on the basis of these and other morphological characters and DNA sequences, S. gallerandianus and S. maroccanus should be included in sect. Jacobaea. This brings the total number of species in this section to 26.
S969	V. Plana	2003	Phylogenetic relationships of the Afro-Malagasy members of the large genus Begonia inferred from trnL intron sequences	Systematic Botany							The first extensive cpDNA phylogeny of African Begonia was estimated with chloroplast trnL intron DNA sequences. A total of 81 Begonia species was sampled and analysed using parsimony and maximum likelihood methods. Analyses showed well-resolved sectional relationships, but little resolution at the base of the phylogeny. Malagasy species of Begonia were monophyletic, as were the mainland African wingless fleshy-fruited species with the exception of section Mezierea. Species in section Mezierea are not as closely related to other wingless fleshy-fruited species as once thought. The section is polyphyletic, with the Malagasy members of the section nested within the Malagasy clade. The phylogenetic position of species in section Mezierea demonstrates that fleshy fruits have evolved at least twice in African Begonia. The terrestrial, 2-tepaled, West and Central African yellow-flowered begonias and their related species are also monophyletic, with the monotypic section Cristasemen and B. iucunda holding a solitary, basal position. The predominantly East and South African species in sections Rostrobegonia, Augustia, Sexalaria and Peltaugustia show greater affinity with Asian and American, rather than other African begonias, and are interdigitated among them; therefore African Begonia are not monophyletic. The trnL intron is a useful region for identifying monophyletic groups across the whole genus and breaking up the genus into workable units. This demonstrates the value of reconstructing phylogenies of large genera in order to achieve more stable classifications.
S915	E. H. Roalson;L. E. Skog;E. A. Zimmer	2003	Phylogenetic relationships and the diversification of floral form in Achimenes (Gesneriaceae)	Systematic Botany	28	3					Achimenes is a genus in the Gesneriaceae, subfamily Gesnerioideae, tribe Gloxinieae that shows remarkable variation in floral form and possibly floral pollination syndrome. This includes flowers that are salverform, tubular, or infundibuliform, white, yellow, pink, purple, and red, and with or without corolla spurs. Previous classifications of Achimenes have relied heavily on floral form as a measure of relationship. This study explores phylogenetic relationships in Achimenes and addresses questions of proper supraspecific classification, evolution of floral forms and pollination syndromes, the origins of floral spurs, chromosome evolution, and biogeographic patterns using nrDNA ITS and cpDNA trnL-F spacer sequences analyzed using maximum parsimony and maximum likelihood methodologies. Phylogenetic hypotheses support the non-monophyly of most of the supraspecific classification units currently recognized in Achimenes, multiple origins of each of the pollination syndromes and the major morphological characteristics used to define these syndromes, multiple origins of floral spurs, multiple tetraploid events, and sympatric distributions of many closely related species.
S919	D. E. Saar;N. O. Polans;P. D. Sorensen	2003	A Phylogenetic Analysis of the genus Dahlia (Asteraceae) Based on Internal and External Transcribed Spacer Regions of Nuclear Ribosomal DNA	Systematic Botany	28						The genus Dahlia presently consists of 35 species, primarily from Mexico. Species are usually placed in four sections: Pseudodendron, Epiphytum, Entemophyllon, and Dahlia, based largely on morphological characters, supplemented with cytological, geographical, and biochemical data. Combined molecular sequence data from both the internal and external transcribed spacer regions (ITS and ETS), located within the nuclear ribosomal gene repeat unit, are used to infer a phylogeny of the genus. Section Entemophyllon forms a very well-defined clade based on these data. Dahlia merckii and D. tubulata are positioned between sect. Entemophyllon the remaining taxa. Sections Pseudodendron and Epiphytum are closely allied with each other and a few species from sect. Dahlia to form the variable root clade (VRC), which incorporates all species with unusual underground structures, along with some species exhibiting the more typical tuberous type. The remaining species of sect. Dahlia form a well-defined clade, the core Dahlia clade (CDC).
S886	L. Schulman;J. Hyvnen	2003	A cladistic analysis of Adelobotrys (Melastomataceae) based on morphology, with notes on generic limits within the tribe Merianieae	Systematic Botany							Adelobotrys (Merianieae: Melastomataceae) is a neotropical, primarily Amazonian genus of 23 lianas and eight arborescent species. A cladistic analysis was performed to test the monophyly of Adelobotrys, discover its synapomorphies, and clarify its internal relationships. The results also allowed a preliminary appraisal of generic limits within Merianieae. For the analysis, 117 morphological characters were coded for 53 ingroup taxa (52 of Adelobotrys plus Sarmentaria decora) and 12 outgroup species from the genera Meriania, Graffenrieda, Axinaea, Centronia, Phainantha, Behuria, Huberia, Pachyloma, and Pternandra. The analysis resulted in a single most parsimonious tree. The result suggests that Adelobotrys is polyphyletic. However, species that fall within the original circumscription of the genus form a well-supported monophyletic group. This group of lianoid species with narrow hypanthia; 5-locular ovaries; short fruiting pedicels; urceolate to globose fruiting hypanthia; elongated, winged seeds; and a vestiture of malpighian hairs is here termed Adelobotrys sensu stricto. Several well-defined lineages are recognized within Adelobotrys s.s., although most of them have only weak support. Purported problems with circumscriptions of merianean genera, in particular Meriania, gained support.
S935	B. B. Simpson;A. Weeks;D. M. Helfgott;L. L. Larkin	2003	Species relationships in Krameria (Krameriaceae) based on ITS sequences and morphology: Implications for character utility and biogeography	Systematic Botany							The Krameriaceae is a monotypic family of 18 species distributed in the warm arid and semiarid regions of North and South America. We have used sequence data from the internal transcribed spacer region of the nuclear ribosomal DNA repeat (ITS 1, 5.8S, and ITS 2) and morphology to infer relationships within Krameria. Using Kallstroemia parviflora, Guaiacum angustifolium, and Tribulus terrestris, three North American members of the Zygophyllaceae as outgroups, our data provide evidence for two major clades in the genus, each containing a North and a South American subclade. Both the major clades and subclades are supported by morphological synapomorphies. The phylogeny does not provide an unequivocal resolution as to the hemisphere in which Krameria arose, but it does indicate an initial split leading to the ancestors of the two clades, each of which subsequently produced radiations in North and South America. Therefore, there must have been two independent dispersals to, or two vicariant episodes involving, North and South America.
S863	J. A. Tate;B. B. Simpson	2003	Paraphyly of Tarasa (Malvaceae) and diverse origins of the polyploid species	Systematic Botany							A molecular phylogenetic analysis of the Andean genus Tarasa (Malvaceae) and related genera yielded unexpected results regarding generic boundaries, the origins of polyploidy, and the morphological attributes of the polyploid taxa. The polyploid species of Tarasa are particularly unusual because they have life histories and floral morphologies that contradict two traditional polyploid dogmas: they are annuals and have smaller floral features (including pollen) than the diploid species. Typically, polyploids are perennial and larger than their parents. Nuclear (ITS1, 5.8S, and ITS2) and chloroplast (psbA-trnH and trnT-trnL spacers, matK-3'trnK intron) sequence data were used to reconstruct independent phylogenies to test the monophyly of the genus, determine its sister group(s), and investigate the origin of the polyploid species. Neither the nuclear nor the chloroplast phylogeny supports monophyly of Tarasa as currently circumscribed. The high Andean genus Nototriche, the North/South American disjunct genus Sphaeralcea, and Malacothamnus chilensis are placed within the Tarasa clade. The polyploid species of Tarasa are not monophyletic and thus have been generated multiple times. These findings suggest that the unusual morphological features of the tetraploids are the result of convergent evolution and not shared ancestry.
S965	C. N. Wang;M. Moeller;Q. C. B. Cronk	2003	Phylogenetic position of Titanotrichum oldhamii (Gesneriaceae) inferred from four different genes	Systematic Botany							Titanotrichum oldhamii has been variously placed in Gesneriaceae or Scrophulariaceae, although most recent taxonomic treatments treat it as a monotypic tribe within Gesneriaceae. In this study, we reconstructed a broad-scale phylogeny containing Titanotrichum using gene sequences from four sequence regions (chloroplast trnL-F intron and spacer and atpB-rbcL spacer, nuclear 26S ribosomal DNA, and the low-copy developmental gene CYCLOIDEA, CYC). The phylogenies inferred from each individual data set and the combined data are congruent in placing Titanotrichum inside Gesneriaceae. The phylogenetic tree based on combined chloroplast and nuclear DNA sequences grouped Titanotrichum with subfamilies Gesnerioideae (New World) and Coronantheroideae (South Pacific and Chile). We have isolated CYC, from most of the represented species of Gesneriaceae and Scrophulariaceae, and this gene phylogeny suggests the same placement of Titanotrichum. CYC was found to evolve three times faster than the trnL-F intron and spacer, 3.3 times faster than the atpB-rbcL spacer, and eight times faster than nuclear 26S rDNA. Although there is considerable phylogenetic information in this fast evolving gene, analysis is problematic because of high levels of homoplasy and paralogy. In addition to a duplication predating a split between New World and Old World taxa (Gcyc1 vs. Gcyc2), there are several subsequent lineage-related duplications (mainly within Gcyc1).
S1003	A. Archambault;A. Bruneau	2004	Phylogenetic utility of the LEAFY/FLORICAULA gene in the Caesalpinioideae (Leguminosae): Gene duplication and a novel insertion	Systematic Botany	29	3	609-626	10.1600/0363644041744374			Nuclear sequence data are needed for plant systematics studies in order to supplement data from the chloroplast genome and from morphology. We cloned and sequenced a partial sequence of LEAFY, from the 3' end of the second intron to the 3' end of the third exon, for 44 species from the three Leguminosae subfamilies, but with greater taxon sampling in the basal subfamily Caesalpinioideae. LEAFY is a single copy gene in the Leguminosae, except in members of tribe Detarieae where our phylogenetic analyses suggest that two copies are present, one of them might be a pseudogene. Sampled species Brownea Jacq.and Browneopsis Huber (Detarieae) possess a large unique insertion, which appears to be a useful taxonomic marker for this bigeneric group. The rate of substitution in the coding sequences of LEAFY gives a phylogenetic signal at a broad spectrum of phylogenetic levels, from the intergeneric level to the family level. The second intron is highly variable, and for the copy that seems to be under relaxed selective constraint, the sequences cannot be compared between species of different tribes or subfamilies. The phylogenetic analysis of LEAFY sequences results in topologies that, overall, are consistent with past taxonomy and chloroplast sequence analyses. However, incongruence between the chloroplast trnL intron and one of the copies of LEAFY is found in the tribe Detarieae. This incongruence remains poorly explained, but may result from hidden paralogy or lineage sorting of divergent alleles. This study thus provides an example of the unexpected complexity that can arise when evaluating the plylogenetic utility of a low-copy nuclear gene.
S926	C. D. Bailey;C. E. Hughes;S. A. Harris	2004	Using RAPDs to Identify DNA Sequence Loci for Species Level Phylogeny Reconstruction: an Example from Leucaena (Fabaceae)	Systematic Botany	29	1	4-14	10.1600/036364404772973483			Resolving phylogenies among closely related species remains a perplexing problem in plant systematics. All too often cpDNA and nrDNA ITS are insufficiently variable to provide desired resolution. In the present study, we have adopted a RAPD-based approach to develop sequence-characterized regions, from the nuclear genome, with levels of DNA sequence variation appropriate for resolving relationships within subclades of Leucaena (Fabaceae). RAPDs were used to amplify a set of seven Leucaena accessions. Equal length fragments amplified in two or more species were sequenced and compared. Specific primers were designed for aligned product sets displaying similar or greater levels of variation than have been found in previous ITS studies. Two regions whose DNA sequences provided greater resolution and bootstrap support than ITS or cpDNA RFLP restriction site data sets for the same sample of Leucaena species are discussed in detail.
S1103	N. E. Bell;A. E. Newton	2004	The Paraphyly of Hypnodendron and the Phylogeny of Related Non-Hypnanaean Pleurocarpous Mosses Inferred from Chloroplast and Mitochondrial Sequence Data	Systematic Botany							The phylogenetic integrity and relationships of the pleurocarpous moss Hypnodendron and several potentially related taxa were investigated using chloroplast rbcL, trnL-F, and rps4 sequence data, the mitochondrial nad5 region, and a set of 29 morphological characters. Strong support was obtained for the recognition of a monophyletic group, the "hypnodendroid pleurocarps", that includes Hypnodendron, Braithwaitea, Pterobryella praenitens, Cyrtopodaceae, Spiridentaceae, and Racopilaceae. This clade is resolved as sister to the Hypnanae with moderately strong support. Hypnodendron is paraphyletic, with H. section Sciadocladus resolved as sister to Pterobryella praenitens and outside of a very well supported clade that includes the other taxa of Hypnodendron in addition to the Spiridentaceae and Cyrtopodaceae. Chloroplast and mitochondrial sequence data show a high degree of congruence, and confidence in critical nodes is increased by long branches, high support values, and indels corresponding to radical modification of sequence and secondary structure within the nad5 group I intron. Based on morphological character state optimisation the hypnodendroid pleurocarps comprise a clade that includes pleisiomorphically dendroid, palmate/umbellate terrestrial plants in addition to a number of derived lineages representing adaptive shifts towards epiphytism. These include the prostrate/creeping Racopilaceae, the dendroid-pinnate species in Hypnodendron section Phoenicobryum, and the simple, large-leaved Spiridentaceae and Cyrtopodaceae. Our data support recognition of hypnodendroid pleurocarps at the ordinal or superordinal level.
S1088	J. Bunsawat;N. E. Elliott;K. L. Hertweck;E. Sproles;L. A. Alice	2004	Phylogenetics of Mentha (Lamiaceae): Evidence from Chloroplast DNA Sequences	Systematic Botany	29						Phylogenetic relationships in Mentha were inferred from DNA sequences of the chloroplast (cp) rpl16 intron and trnL-trnF region. The objectives were to test monophyly of Mentha and each of its sections and assess relationships among Mentha species. Based on cpDNA data, Mentha is strongly supported as monophyletic. The suggestions that M. cervina and M. cunninghamii should be placed in other genera gain no support from this analysis. Mentha cervina is sister to M. gattefossei, and the New Zealand endemic, M. cunninghamii, is allied with species from Australia (M. australis, M. diemenica, M. satureioides). No recognized section with more than one species sampled forms a monophyletic group. Section Pulegium may be monophyletic, but the third member of this section, M. grandiflora, was not sampled. Chloroplast DNA sequences of the putative allopolyploids M. canadensis and M. spicata suggest that M. arvensis and M. longifolia, respectively, may be their maternal parents.
S1069	Z. D. Chen;J. Li	2004	Phylogenetics and biogeography of Alnus (Betulaceae) inferrred from sequences of nuclear ribosomal DNA ITS region	Systematic Botany							Sequences of nuclear ribosomal DNA ITS region were used to estimate phylogenetic relationships of Alnus. Our data recognize three major clades in Alnus including subgenera Alnobetula, Clethropsis, and Alnus; subgenus Alnobetula is sister to the clade containing subgenera Clethropsis and Alnus. The eastern Asian subgenus or section Cremastogyne is embedded in the subgenus Alnus clade. A. nepalensis is more closely related to subgenus Alnus than to subgenus Clethropsis. A. maritima is allied with subgenus Clethropsis (excl. A. nepalensis). Subsessile or sessile male inflorescence and winter buds are probably plesiomorphies in Alnus, while synflorescences, one-year floral phenology, and fall-blooming may be derived features. The simple axillary female inflorescence has evolved more than once in Alnus. Central and South American species of Alnus might be migrants from eastern Asia via Bering Land Bridge and western North America. In subgenus Clethropsis, A. formosana of eastern Asia is more closely related to eastern North American species than to the other Asian species, A. nitida. The low sequence divergence within both the A. incana and A. viridis species complexes suggests their recent history of diversification in the circumpolar areas.
S951	J. I. Davis;D. W. Stevenson;G. Petersen;O. Seberg;L. M. Campbell;J. V. Freudenstein;D. H. Goldman;C. R. Hardy;F. A. Michelangeli;M. P. Simmons;C. D. Specht;F. V. Silva	2004	A Phylogeny of the Monocots, as Inferred from rbcL and atpA Sequence Variation	Systematic Botany	29		467-510				A Phylogenetic analysis of the monocots was conducted, using a two gene data set (atpA, encoded in the mitochondrial genome, and rbcL, encoded in the plastid genome). The taxon set included 177 monocots and 41 dicot outgroups. The results provide a comprehensive hypothesis of relationships for the monocots, and evidence concerning the placement of several groups of controversial relationship. Among the major relationships resolved by the analysis are the placement of a clade comprising four dicot groups (Winteraceae, Piperales, Magnoliales, and Laurales) as sister of the monocots; and the inclusion of Acorus within a clade that also includes Araceae, Tofieldiaceae, and a traditionally delimited Alismatales, with Acorus the sister of Alismatales, and with the entire group placed as sister of a clade that includes all other monocots. Nartheciaceae are placed as sister of Pandanales, and Corsiaceae as sister of Liliales. Dioscoreales are placed as the sister of Arecaceae, with this clade constituting an early-diverging lineage within the commelinid monocots. Zingiberales are resolved as the sister group of Commelinales, with Hanguana included in the latter, as sister of a clade consisting of Commelinaceae and Pontederiaceae. Trithuria (Hydatellaceae) and Mayaca appear to be closely related to some or all elements of Xyridaceae. A clade consisting of Joinvillea, Ecdeiocolea, and Poaceae is resolved, with the latter two resolved as sister taxa.
S998	M. J. Donoghue;B. G. Baldwin;J. Li;R. C. Winkworth	2004	Viburnum phylogeny based on chloroplast trnK intron and nuclear ribosomal ITS DNA sequences	Systematic Botany	29	1					Phylogenetic analyses of chloroplast trnK intron and nuclear ribosomal ITS DNA sequences yield significant improvements in our understanding of relationships, character evolution, and biogeography in Viburnum (Adoxaceae). We confirm that most of the ten traditionally recognized sections are monophyletic. The most striking exception is Odontotinus, which is divided into: (i) a purple-fruited New World clade within which the Latin American section Oreinotinus is nested, and (ii) an Old World, mostly red-fruited clade that is closely related to V. cylindricum (section Megalotinus) and the New World, purple-fruited V. acerifolium. We identify three major supra-sectional groupings: (i) a clade consisting of the Odontotinus-Oreinotinus-Megalotinus complex, the circum-boreal section Opulus, and the Eurasian section Tinus, (ii) a clade containing the Old World section Viburnum, the New World section Lentago, and, with less support, section Pseudotinus, and (iii) a clade containing the Asian sections Tomentosa and Solenotinus. Two species are not clearly allied to any of these supra-sectional clades: V. urceolatum, a Taiwanese/Japanese species traditionally placed in section Viburnum, and V. clemensiae, a Bornean species previously assigned to section Solenotinus. The placement of the root also remains uncertain, but probably does not fall within any of the three major supra-sectional clades. Knowledge of relationships within sections is useful in clarifying historical biogeography and the evolution of sterile flowers and fruit color. The one case of conflict between datasets highlights a possible instance of homoploid hybrid speciation.
S1009	S. R. Downie;F. J. Sun;D. Katz-Downie;G. J. Colletti	2004	A Phylogenetic Study of Perideridia (Apiaceae) Based on Nuclear Ribosomal DNA ITS Sequences	Systematic Botany							A phylogenetic study of the genus Perideridia (Apiaceae; tribe Oenantheae) was conducted to elucidate its circumscription, infrageneric relationships, and patterns in the evolution of available morphological, anatomical, and cytological characters. Nuclear rDNA ITS sequences were procured from 84 accessions of Perideridia, representing all 14 of its species and four of its six subspecies, and five outgroup taxa, and analyzed using maximum parsimony, maximum likelihood, and Bayesian inference methods. The trees recovered by each of these optimality criteria were congruent and generally quite robust. Upon the removal of the east Asian Perideridia neurophylla, previously referable to Pterygopleurum neurophyllum, the genus Perideridia is monophyletic and exclusively North American in distribution. Three major clades within the genus are inferred; the midwestern U.S. Perideridia americana is sister to all other species. With the exceptions of Perideridia lemmonii and P. bolanderi (where each species comprises two separate lineages), and P. oregana (whose limits are expanded to include tetraploid populations previously referred to as P. leptocarpa), all taxa were recovered as monophyletic. Optimization of 16 non-molecular characters on a phylogeny inferred by maximum parsimony analysis of combined ITS and non-molecular data revealed high instances of homoplasy, with the clade of P. howellii and P. kelloggii, taxa characterized by monostelic roots, supported by four of six synapomorphies. The occurrence of multistelic tuberous roots in all other species of Perideridia and in the unrelated Pterygopleurum neurophyllum suggests that this uncommon character among dicots has evolved twice in the family Apiaceae.
S1121	F. Forest;V. Savolainen;M. W. Chase;R. Lupia;A. Bruneau;P. R. Crane	2004	Multiple calibration points, paleobotanical confidence intervals and the estimation of divergence times: A case study from the birch family (Betulaceae)	Systematic Botany							Fossils are widely used as calibration points in molecular-based dating studies and their placement on a phylogenetic tree of extant species is never done without subjectivity. We explore some of the problems linked to calibration with fossils, in particular their position on the tree, and emphasize the use of multiple calibration points to obtain better estimates. We use a phylogenetic analysis of Betulaceae based on nuclear ribosomal DNA sequences (5S spacer and ITS) as a case study and estimated divergence times within the family using the nonparametric rate smoothing method of Sanderson and five calibration points from the extensive fossil record of the family. To assess the effects of assumptions relating to the positions of key fossils with respect to stem lineages versus crown groups, we calculated age estimates by placing each fossil subsequently on the stem lineage node and crown group node, and then determined the median value of the resulting 10 estimates for each node. According to these results, the median values of the crown group and stem lineage of Betulaceae vary from 115.2 to 130.6 million years and 211.2 to 302.6 million years, respectively (branch lengths based on maximum likelihood and DELTRAN and ACCTRAN parsimony estimates). Paleobotanical confidence intervals were determined on the palynological fossil record of Alnus and related extinct genera using methods based on the occurrence of fossils on a stratigraphic column and the lengths of the gaps between these occurrences. The median values of molecular estimates indicate that Betulaceae started to diversify in the Aptian or before, an estimate much older than inferred from the fossil record of triporate pollen. Paleobotanical confidence intervals are more realistic, inferring the earliest appearance of betulaceous components in the Albian-Cenomanian floras. The discrepancy between molecular-based age estimates and the angiosperm fossil record as a whole still needs to be resolved.
S1220	L. L. Forrest;M. Hughes;P. M. Hollingsworth	2004	A phylogeny of Begonia using nuclear ribosomal sequence data and non-molecular characters	Systematic Botany							With ca. 1400 species, Begonia is one of the largest plant genera. In order to address the evolution of Begonia we have produced maximum parsimony cladograms for nuclear large subunit and internal transcribed spacer sequence data in combination with 34 informative morphological characters. Data were obtained from 64 species of Begonia, the monotypic genus Hillebrandia, and both species of Datisca. The resulting phylogenetic hypotheses supported three main clades within Begonia, two internally resolved clades of African plants, and one unresolved transcontinental clade containing species from southern Africa, America, Asia, and the Socotran archipelago. Morphological characters often support well-resolved molecular clades. Tepal number in the staminate and carpellate flowers and fruit characters are discussed. None of the morphological characters sampled, including traditionally emphasized characters in sectional delimitations such as locule number and number of placental branches, provides a basis for subdividing Begonia into easily circumscribed monophyletic groups. Implications for future sectional classifications of Begonia are discussed.
S999	B. Gravendeel;M. C. M. Eurlings;C. van den Berg;P. J. Cribb	2004	Phylogeny of Pleione (Orchidaceae) and parentage analysis of its wild hybrids based on plastid and nrITS sequences and morphological data	Systematic Botany							Phylogenetic relationships within the orchid genus Pleione were reconstructed using maximum parsimony analyses of plastid and nuclear DNA and morphology for 21 taxa to evaluate subgeneric groups, controversial species delimitations, and parentage of several putative wild hybrids. Separate analyses of each data set produced mainly congruent clades when P. x confusa and the Chinese accession of P. hookeriana were excluded. Analysis of the combined data indicated that traditional divisions of the genus into various subgenera and sections are supported when they are based on apomorphic characters. Sections found to be paraphyletic are based on homoplasious and plesiomorphic characters. For a subgeneric classification of Pleione based on phylogenetic relationships three groups are suggested. Taxa within the P. bulbocodioides complex do not show much molecular divergence. Pleione maculata and P. praecox are proposed to be the paternal and maternal parent of P. x lagenaria, respectively, as their nuclear and plastid genomes were almost identical to their natural hybrid. Furthermore, DNA sequences confirm the paternal and maternal parent origin of P. x confusa from P. forrestii and P. albiflora as already suggested by morphological and karyotype data. Molecular data are not conclusive about parentages of P. x taliensis.
S964	J. M. Guillon	2004	Phylogeny of horsetails (Equisetum) based on chloroplast rps4 gene and adjacent noncoding sequences	Systematic Botany	29		251-259				Equisetum is a genus of 15 extant species that are the sole surviving representatives of the class Sphenopsida. Chloroplast DNA sequence data were used to examine the monophyly of the two accepted subgenera (Equisetum and Hippochaete) and the putative basal position of Equisetum giganteum. A plastid DNA region that includes rps4 was sequenced for all species of Equisetum. Phylogenetic analyses using parsimony, likelihood or posterior probability criteria, all support the following inferences: (1) Equisetum bogotense is basal within the genus; (2) all other species group in two major sister clades: (i) the rest of subgenus Equisetum (7 species) and (ii) subgenus Hippochaete (7 species). On the basis of the present phylogeny, bisexuality would not be the ancestral state in the Equisetum genus, but characters shared among species of the subgenus Equisetum, such as superficial stomata and protruding antheridia, could be ancestral in the genus.
S1000	J. C. Hall;H. H. Iltis;K. J. Sytsma	2004	Molecular phylogenetics of core Brassicales, placement of orphan genera Emblingia, Forchhammeria,Tirania, and character evolution	Systematic Botany							Many genera previously placed in the traditionally circumscribed Capparaceae are either unrelated or, more commonly, isolated lineages in the order Brassicales. This study examines the relationships of three of these orphan genera, Emblingia, Forchhammeria, and Tirania, in the context of a focused analysis of the core Brassicales. In order to assess relationships of these genera, analyses were conducted across Brassicales using chloroplast rbcL, ndhF, and matK sequence information. Both maximum parsimony and maximum likelihood analyses place all three genera in the well-supported core Brassicales (Brassicaceae, Capparaceae, Cleomaceae, Gyrostemonaceae, Pentadiplandraceae, Resedaceae, and Tovariaceae). The Asiatic Tirania and New World tropical Forchhammeria are closely related to two small families, the pan-temperate Resedaceae and the Australian Gyrostemonaceae. These analyses also indicate a novel placement of Emblingia as sister to all remaining members of core Brassicales. Although there is strong support for the relationships among most of these taxa, relationships of Pentadiplandraceae and Tovariaceae are weakly resolved. Thus, the core Brassicales is a biogeographically dispersed lineage that is comprised of many small and morphologically distinct clades plus the large crown group Brassicaceae s. lat. Patterns of morphological evolution appear complex, especially in floral merosity and carpel and locule number. Likewise, the evolution of breeding systems within this lineage involves recurrent shifts towards monoecy or dioecy, and possible reversals back to bisexuality. Further sampling of Capparaceae tribe Stixeae is critical for any taxonomic recommendation of familial status for these orphan genera.
S1013	T. A. Hedderson;D. J. Murray;C. J. Cox;T. L. Nowell	2004	Phylogenetic relationships of haplolepideous mosses (Dicranidae) inferred from rps4 gene sequences	Systematic Botany	29		29-41				The haplolepideous mosses (Dicranidae) constitute a large group of ecologically and morphologically diverse species recognised primarily by having peristome teeth with a single row of cells on the dorsal surface. The reduction of sporophytes in numerous moss lineages renders circumscription of the Dicranidae problematic. Delimitation of genera and higher taxa within it has also been difficult. We analyse chloroplast-encoded rps4 gene sequences for 129 mosses, including representatives of nearly all the haplolepideous families and subfamilies, using parsimony, likelihood and Bayesian criteria. The data set includes 59 new sequences generated for this study. With the exception of Bryobartramia, which falls within the Encalyptaceae, the Dicranidae are resolved in all analyses as a monophyletic group including the extremely reduced Archidiales and Ephemeraceae. The monotypic Catoscopium, usually assigned to the Bryidae is consistently resolved as sister to Dicranidae, and this lineage has a high posterior probability under the Bayesian criterion. Within the Dicranidae, a core clade is resolved that comprises most of the species sampled, and all analyses identify a proto-haplolepideous grade of taxa previously placed in various haplolepideous families. The data provide considerable resolution of relationships within the core Dicranidae, yielding a number of well-supported clades. These correspond only roughly to taxa that are currently recognised, and most families and orders of Dicranidae apparently are non-monophyletic under their current circumscriptions.
S1053	D. M. Helfgott;R. J. Mason-Gamer	2004	The Evolution of North American Elymus (Triticeae, Poaceae) Allotetraploids: Evidence from Phosphoenolpyruvate Carboxylase Gene Sequences	Systematic Botany							Cytogenetic studies of North American Elymus suggest that the genus is an allopolyploid derivative of Pseudoroegneria (St) and Hordeum (H). To test this, we conducted a phylogenetic analysis of North American Elymus species within a broad sample of diploid Triticeae taxa using cloned sequences from a member of the nuclear gene family encoding phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase. This gene copy is orthologous to a housekeeping form in Sorghum vulgare. The phylogeny supports the hypothesis that Pseudoroegneria and Hordeum are the diploid progenitors of the North American Elymus tetraploids. Each tetraploid Elymus individual has two distinct forms of the gene, and each form is in a strongly supported clade with sequences from either Pseudoroegneria or Hordeum, suggesting that these Elymus species have an St + H genomic content. This pattern is consistent with a single (or multiple very similar) polyploid ancestor(s) of the North American tetraploids, confirming earlier results based on granule-bound starch synthase I gene sequence data. We also examined the utility of the phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase gene to reconstruct the evolutionary history of the Triticeae by comparing it to starch synthase gene sequence data. Both nuclear data sets are phylogenetically informative, but suggest somewhat different evolutionary histories among genera within the tribe.
S1099	L. Hufford;M. M. McMahon	2004	Morphological evolution and systematics of Synthyris and Besseya (Veronicaceae): A phylogenetic analysis	Systematic Botany							Phylogenetic analyses were used to examine the morphological diversity and systematics of Synthyris and Besseya. Strong support was found for the monophyly of Synthyris and Besseya among Veronicaceae in parsimony analyses that applied DNA sequences from the nuclear ribosomal ITS regions. Parsimony and maximum likelihood (ML) criteria provided consistent hypotheses of clades of Synthyris and Besseya based on the ITS data. The combination of morphological characters and ITS data helped to resolve additional clades of Synthyris and Besseya. The results show that Synthyris is paraphyletic to Besseya. In the monophyletic Synthyris clade, Besseya forms part of a Northwest clade that also includes the alpine dissected leaf clade (S. canbyi, S. dissecta, and S. lanuginosa) and mesic forest S. cordata, S. reniformis, S. platycarpa, and S. schizantha. The Northwest clade is the sister of S. borealis, which is disjunct in unglaciated regions of Alaska and Yukon. An Intermountain clade, consisting of S. ranunculina, S. laciniata, S. pinnatifida, and S. missurica, was the sister to the rest of the Synthyris clade. We designed constraint topologies based on prior hypotheses of relationships and morphological similarities and applied these in ML analyses. Parametric bootstrapping was used to compare the likelihood values of the best trees obtained in searches under constraints to that of the best tree found without constraints. These results indicate that topologies in which a monophyletic Synthyris is the sister of Besseya are significantly worse than the best ML tree in which Synthyris is paraphyletic to Besseya. The parametric bootstrap results also indicate that forcing either the monophyly of all taxa that have deeply incised leaf margins or those that have reniform laminas and broadly rounded apices results in trees that are significantly worse than the best ML tree, in which leaf margin incision and reniform laminas are homoplastic. We propose a new classification for Synthyris that emphasizes monophyletic groups. The new combination Synthyris oblongifolia (Pennell) Hufford & McMahon is proposed.
S1144	S. M. Ickert-Bond;M. F. Wocjiechowski	2004	Phylogenetic Relationships in Ephedra (Gnetales): Evidence from Nuclear and Chloroplast DNA Sequence Data	Systematic Botany							Sequences from the nuclear ribosomal internal transcribed spacer region 1 (nrDNA ITS1) and the plastid rps4 gene from the genus Ephedra (Ephedraceae, Gnetales) were obtained in order to infer phylogenetic relationships, character evolution, and historical biogeography in the genus. Within Ephedra the length of the nrDNA ITS1 varied from 1,081 to 1,143 basepairs (bp), in contrast to dramatically shorter lengths in the outgroups (Gnetum, Welwitschia, and Pinus). The rps4 locus varied in length from 645 to 661 bp in the same set of taxa. Both parsimony and maximum likelihood analyses of these sequences resulted in a well-resolved phylogeny that supports the monophyly of Ephedra, but not its subdivision into the traditional sections Ephedra, Asarca, and Alatae. The resulting phylogeny also indicates a derivation of the New World clade from among the Old World taxa. Among the Old World species three highly-supported monophyletic groups are recognized that are highly concordant with morphological evidence. The New World clade includes two main subclades of North and South American species that are strongly supported, while the position of two, mostly Mexican species E. pedunculata and E. compacta remains unresolved. Character reconstruction of ovulate strobilus types in Ephedra indicates that fleshy bracts are ancestral, with shifts to dry, winged bracts having occurred multiple times. Low levels of sequence divergence within the North American clade suggest either recent and rapid ecological radiation or highly conservative ribosomal DNA evolution within the clade.
S1030	A. L. Ingram;J. J. Doyle	2004	Is Eragrostis (Poaceae) monophyletic? Insights from plastid and nuclear sequence data	Systematic Botany							Eragrostis is a large genus of grasses in subfamily Chloridoideae of the Poaceae. Recent phylogenetic analyses have suggested that the group may not be monophyletic, and there are a number of segregate genera that may be better placed within Eragrostis. We have used molecular sequence data from the plastid locus rps16 and the nuclear gene waxy from a broad sample of Eragrostis species and representatives of six of the seven segregate genera to address these issues. We find that Eragrostis is a monophyletic group with the inclusion of four segregate genera: Acamptoclados, Diandrochloa, Neeragrostis, and Pogonarthria. The placement of Cladoraphis and Stiburus is uncertain. Thellungia does not belong in Eragrostis and is actually more closely related to Sporobolus.
S1108	L. B. Johansen	2004	Phylogeny of Orchidantha (Lowiaceae) and the Zingiberales based on six DNA Regions	Systematic Botany	30						Very little is known about the small, tropical, monotypic monocotyledon family Lowiaceae within the order Zingiberales. Orchidantha includes at least 16 species. The phylogenetic position of Lowiaceae within Zingiberales is unclear, as are relationships within the family. This paper presents a phylogenetic analysis of Zingiberales based on 613 parsimony informative characters of the plastid matK gene, the trnL-trnF region, the rps16 intron, and a conservative part of the nuclear ribosomal ITS region (part of the 18S, 5.8S, and 26S rDNA). The resulting single most parsimonious tree indicates that Lowiaceae is sister to all the remaining families of Zingiberales. An analysis of the family (14 species) based on a data set consisting of six plastid and nuclear DNA regions, includes the first use of a cam intron for estimating phylogeny. The results suggest that the cam intron may be useful for other lower taxonomic level phylogenetic analyses. In the resulting tree all Bornean species of Orchidantha form a strongly supported monophyletic group. An equally strongly supported clade within the Bornean group contains the species distributed in Sabah (Malaysia) and Brunei. The species from mainland Asia form a poorly supported group because of the unclear position of Orchidantha chinensis. However, the four Malay Peninsula species with flowers possessing a white labellum are strongly supported.
S1132	Y. Kita;M. Kato	2004	Molecular Phylogeny of Cladopus and Hydrobryum (Podostemaceae, Podostemoideae) with Implications for their Biogeography in East Asia	Systematic Botany							Molecular data from Cladopus and Hydrobryum, members of the aquatic angiosperm family Podostemaceae, were analyzed phylogenetically using the chloroplast matK gene and internal transcribed spacer (ITS) regions of the nuclear ribosomal RNA (nrRNA) gene to infer the species relationships and the biogeographic history of the East Asian species. The phylogenies based on matK and ITS were incongruent for relationships in a northern clade of Cladopus, but the pattern of root morphologies (ribbon vs. linear) agreed with the matK phylogeny. The matK phylogeny revealed that all East Asian temperate species of each genus form a monophyletic group that is derived from tropical/subtropical species. The clock-constrained maximum-likelihood tree suggests that the divergence events of the temperate lineages from their tropical sisters occurred coevally in the two genera. The dispersal-vicariance analysis (DIVA) suggests that distribution at the middle latitudes was formed by a wide primary distribution covering tropical and temperate areas and a secondary dispersal event in Cladopus, and by a dispersal event in Hydrobryum. Two Kyushu-Fujian groups are found in Cladopus, one consisting of Japanese C. austro-osumiensis and Chinese C. fukiensis and another consisting of Japanese C. japonicus, C. austrosatsumensis, and C. doianus and Chinese C. chinensis, each of which shows little genetic differentiation between species from Kyushu, southern Japan, and Fujian, China, suggesting parallel biogeographic histories. Disjunct populations of Hydrobryum japonicum from Kyushu in southern Japan and from northern Thailand show little genetic differentiation, whereas a plant from Yunnan, China, diverged earlier than did the Japanese or Thai plants. The DIVA results suggest that the disjunctive distribution of Hydrobryum japonicum was formed by two dispersal events from Kyushu to Yunnan and to northern Thailand.
S1054	M. Koch;I. Al-Shehbaz	2004	Taxonomic and phylogenetic evaluation of the AmericanThlaspi species: Identity and relationships to the Eurasian genus Noccaea (Brassicaceae)	Systematic Botany							Nuclear ribosomal (ITS) and plastid (trnL-trnF) DNA sequence data from representatives of most New World species of Thlaspi (Brassicaceae), including the widespread North American T. montanum, have been studied to investigate their relationship to the Eurasian members now placed in the genus Noccaea, especially the European T. montanum (= N. montana) complex. ITS sequence data of the New World taxa were added to a previously published data set, which includes sequences of representative taxa of 11 of the 12 genera segregated from Thlaspi, to elucidate overall relationships within Thlaspi s.l. Sequences from Callothlaspi, Kotschyella, Masmenia, Microthlaspi, Neurotropis, Noccaea, Noccidium, Pseudosempervivum, Raparia, Thlaspi s.s., Thlaspiceras, and Vania, as well as of the closely related genera Bivonaea, Alliaria, Peltaria, and Teesdalia, were included in the study. The results show that the New World taxa of Thlaspi form a monophyletic group that should be assigned to Noccaea and that the North American T. montanum is unrelated to the European plants referred to this species. Sequence distance values are of an order of magnitude that favors Pleistocene speciation and migration of the perennial Thlaspi species into the New World. It is concluded that the North American infraspecific taxa of T. montanum be recognized as Noccaea fendleri. The new combinations N. fendleri subsp. californica, N. fendleri subsp. glauca, N. fendleri subsp. idahoense, and N. fendleri subsp. siskiyouense are proposed.
S1140	K. A. Kristiansen;M. Cilieborg;L. Drábková;T. Jørgensen;G. Petersen;O. Seberg	2004	DNA Taxonomy - the Riddle of Oxychlo√´ (Juncaceae)	Systematic Botany							Recently, advocates of DNA taxonomy have complained that there is no control of the taxonomy in e.g. GenBank. This is correct, but the uncertainty may be extended to the sequences themselves. The present study shows as long as vouchers are available neither problem is fatal, but if no voucher exists bad sequences and bad taxonomy may be forever linked. Previous phylogenetic analyses of rbcL sequences have indicated that the small, south hemispheric, genus Oxychloë (Juncaceae) surprisingly either is embedded within or sister group to the Cyperaceae. This is not in accordance with traditional or current morphological data. By studying five new accessions, representing four species of Oxychloë, and re-examining the two vouchers of the species, O. andina, previously used in phylogenies it has been possible to show that these two sequences are erroneous. One being a chimeric sequence and the other most likely contaminated.
S1089	S. Liede-Schumann;A. Rapini;D. J. Goyder;M. W. Chase	2004	Phylogenetics of the New World subtribes of Asclepiadeae (Apocynaceae - Asclepiadoideae): Metastelmatinae, Oxypetalinae, and Gonolobinae	Systematic Botany							Analysis of the trnT-trnL spacer, the trnL intron, the trnL-trnF spacer, and the rps16 intron of 106 species in 34 of the 45 genera of New World Asclepiadeae in the former subtribes Metastelmatinae, Oxypetalinae, and Gonolobinae shows that these genera form a well-supported clade (MOG). The small Andean genus Pentacyphus is sister to the MOG clade. The former Gonolobinae form a well-supported subclade closely related to members of Tassadia, Funastrum, and the former Oxypetalinae. The only genera that are monophyletic as presently circumscribed are Tassadia and Funastrum. The separation of Tweedia from Oxypetalum is justified by our results. Philibertia will be monophyletic if Amblystigma, Fontellaea, Melinia, Mitostigma, and Podandra are included. Most species of Blepharodon and Hemipogon are not monophyletic with the respective type species. Some former Astephanus and Cynanchum species as well as the monotypic Grisebachiella are imbedded in Diplolepis (D. descolei, D. geminiflora, D. hieronymi, D. boerhaviifolia, and D. nummulariifolia). The neglected tribe Orthosieae is recognized at subtribal level, Orthosiinae. Chromosome numbers (as far as known) show a tendency for reduction in several clades. The study sets a framework for future study of the American MOG genera and highlights areas in need of further attention.
S1097	U. Lohwasser;A. Granda;F. R. Blattner	2004	Phylogenetic analysis of Microseris (Asteraceae), including a newly discovered Andean population from Peru	Systematic Botany	29						In high elevation habitats of the Peruvian Andes a new population of Microseris (Asteraceae, Lactuceae) related to the single South American species, M. pygmaea, recently was discovered. Microseris pygmaea occurs at lower elevations in Chile and has originated after long-distance dispersal from a Californian progenitor. Differences in flowering traits and habitat preferences of the new population raised the question of its precise phylogenetic affiliation. The analysis of the nuclear rDNA internal transcribed spacer (ITS) region of all Microseris species revealed the Peruvian plants as part of the Chilean M. pygmaea clade. Molecular, ecological, and physiological data resulted in an interpretation of the Peruvian population as derived from Chilean progenitors instead of being remnants of stepping-stone dispersal from North America through the Andes to Chile. Differences in ITS sequences found in this study compared to earlier ones were explained by the occurrence of two different rDNA clusters in the genome of Microseris, which were preferentially amplified by differences in the PCR protocols.
S1022	V. Malécot;D. L. Nickrent;P. Baas;L. van den Oever;D. Lobreau-Callen	2004	A morphological cladistic analysis of Olacaceae	Systematic Botany	29	3	569-586				A cladistic study based on morphological characters is presented for all 28 genera of Olacaceae as well as 26 representative genera from five other families of Santalales: Loranthaceae, Misodendraceae, Opiliaceae, Santalaceae, and Viscaceae. The data matrix consists of 80 macro-morphological, palynological, and anatomical characters. The phylogenetic trees obtained show a paraphyletic Olacaceae with four main clades. Some of these clades are congruent with previously recognized tribes, but all of subfamilies are para- or polyphyletic. Examination of character transformations confirms several assumptions of evolutionary trends within Olacaceae and Santalales, however, others appear to be more complex than expected. Optimization of trophic mode on the consensus tree shows that root hemiparasitism had a single origin in Santalales. Whatever the optimization procedure used, the basal-most clade of Olacaceae consists of 12 genera, among which five are known to be autotrophs, whereas the remaining three clades (15 genera) contain four genera known to be root parasites.
S1169	M. M. Martinez-Ortega;L. Delgado;D. C. Albach;J. A. Elena-Rossello;E. Rico	2004	Species boundaries and phylogeographic patterns in cryptic taxa inferred from AFLP markers: Veronica subgen. Pentasepalae (Scrophulariaceae) in the Western Mediterranean	Systematic Botany	29	4	965-986				We show the power of detailed AFLP study to address questions of species delimitation and genetic diversity in morphologically-cryptic plants. We have combined this technique with karyological studies to explore species boundaries in the Western Mediterranean representatives of Veronica subgen. Pentasepalae. Several members of this subgenus are represented in the Iberian Peninsula and North Africa by morphologically similar populations, which lead to different taxonomic hypotheses. We have analyzed genetic variation with two different objectives: first, to provide a basis on which one taxonomic hypothesis is favored against its alternatives, and second, to obtain a satisfactory interpretation of phylogeographic patterns. The usefulness of several parameters and analyses is considered in order to help rank taxa and to reveal details of their speciation modes. Some of these parameters are presented with a geographical background to facilitate phylogeographic interpretations. The data support one of the previously proposed taxonomic hypotheses, which results in the recognition of eight taxa. An east-to-west migration route within the Iberian Peninsula is hypothesized, coinciding with the general pattern proposed for Veronica subgen. Pentasepalae. Further data on genetic variability and chromosome counts for 41 populations are provided.
S1033	S. Mayuzumi;H. Ohba	2004	The phylogenetic position of eastern Asian Sedoideae (Crassulaceae) inferred from chloroplast and nuclear DNA	Systematic Botany							The phylogenetic position of 74 taxa of Asian Sedoideae (Crassulaceae) were estimated based on analyses of the trnL-trnF intergenic spacer sequence of cpDNA and the ITS region, including the 5.8S rDNA sequence, of nDNA. Our analyses suggest that the subfamily Sedoideae is not monophyletic and the genus Sedum especially is highly paraphyletic. Recent studies based on cpDNA restriction-site variation and the matK region recognized seven clades of major importance. In our analyses, four major clades were recovered; Kalanchoe, Sempervivum, Aeonium and Acre. All Asian Sedum (s.s.) tested are included in the Acre clade, and all other eastern Asian genera are in groups corresponding to the Telephium clade. The Telephium clade is split into four strongly supported subclades, Rhodiola, Hylotelephium, Phedimus, and Umbilicus, and is determined to be polyphyletic. All eastern Asian genera that were segregated from Sedum are separated in a lineage distinct from Sedum (s.s.). Hylotelephium, Orostachys, Meterostachys, and Sinocrassula are closely related and Hylotelephium is polyphyletic, as is also Orostachys. The infrageneric taxa within Hylotelephium and Rhodiola are indicated to be polyphyletic.
S1037	A. W. Meerow;H. van der Werff	2004	Pucara (Amaryllidaceae) reduced to synonomy with Stenomesson on the basis of nuclear and plastid DNA spacer sequences, and a new related species of Stenomesson	Systematic Botany							Pucara leucantha is transferred to Stenomesson based on the phylogenetic position of Pucara resolved by nuclear and plastid DNA sequences. An allied species, Stenomesson chloranthum, is described from the Departments of Amazonas and Cajamarca in Peru, but at lower elevation. Both of these species release their pollen in tetrads, unique within Amaryllidaceae, and have tri-lobed stigmas, unique within Stenomesson.
S1068	A. Mitchell;J. Wen	2004	Phylogeny and Biogeography of Brassaiopsis (Araliaceae), based on phylogenetic analysis of nuclear (ITS and 5S-NTS) DNA sequences	Systematic Botany							The phylogeny of Brassaiopsis (Araliaceae), a morphologically diverse and widely distributed genus in Asia (from Malesia through Indochina into China and the Himalayan region), was estimated based on sequences of the internal transcribed spacer regions (ITS) and 5S nontranscribed spacer (5S-NTS) of the nuclear ribosomal DNA. Two main paralogous copies of 5S-NTS were found for Brassaiopsis but both were not recovered for all species. All but one species of Brassaiopsis was represented by 5S-NTS (copy 1). Separate parsimony analyses of ITS and 5S-NTS (copy 1) generated mainly congruent topologies, but several non-monophyletic sequences in the 5S-NTS tree precluded data combination. A sister relationship of Brassaiopsis with Trevesia was strongly inferred, as was the monophyly of Brassaiopsis. The divergence of Brassaiopsis from Trevesia was estimated using a likelihood method to have occurred ca. 20 million years ago (MYA) during a period of mountain building and climatic change in SE Asia. Resolution of relationships was poor among monophyletic groups within Brassaiopsis and the divergence among species was inferred to have occurred relatively recently at ca. 8 MYA. However, several clades within the genus were circumscribed based on ITS and 5S-NTS analyses, i.e., 1) B. aculeata, B. glomerulata, and B. hainla; 2) B. grushvitzkyi, B. moumingensis, B. phanrangensis, and B. stellata; 3) B. ciliata and B. hispida; 4) B. fatsioides and B. palmipes; and 5) B. gracilis and B. tripteris. Brassaiopsis producta was clearly isolated in both analyses. Morphological characters previously considered important for defining species and subgeneric groups were shown to have had multiple origins (e.g., leaf architecture and locular number in the ovary). The Brassaiopsis phylogeny supports strong biogeographic connections of South China and Indochina, South China and southwestern China, and southwestern China and the eastern Himalayas.
S997	M. E. Mort;D. J. Crawford;K. N. Fairfield	2004	Phylogeny and character evolution in California Coreopsis: Insights from morphology and from sequences of the nuclear and plastid genomes	Systematic Botany							Phylogenetic relationships were reconstructed using both molecular (nrDNA ITS and rpl16) and morphological data for eight species of Coreopsis that are almost exclusively restricted to California. Parsimony analyses were conducted on each of three data partitions (cpDNA, ITS, and morphology) and congruence between these topologies and data sets was assessed by inspecting the topology of ìhardî incongruence and via the partition homogeneity test (PHT). The individual topologies were largely congruent (i.e. lacking ìhardî incongruence), with the exception of the placement of C. caliopsidea by analyses of morphological data. Because the two molecular data sets are generally in agreement regarding the placement of this taxon, the morphological data for C. caliopsidea were pruned; PHT tests of this pruned data set indicated no significant heterogeneity among the data partitions. Therefore the data were combined and reanalyzed. The resulting topology supports the monophyly of sections Tuckermannia and Leptosyne; however, section Pugiopappus is not monophyletic. This latter section as traditionally defined includes species that display an annual habit and dimorphic cypselae. Examining the evolution of these two features in light of the phylogeny indicates that each has arisen twice. The evolution of two other features, pubescent fruits and the presence of pappus scales, is more complex than previously suggested. Alternative reconstructions of the evolution of these features are presented.
S1180	R. L. O'Quinn;L. Hufford	2004	Molecular systematics of Montieae (Portulacaceae): implications for taxonomy, biogeography and ecology	Systematic Botany							DNA sequence data from nuclear ribosomal internal transcribed spacer, including the 5.8s coding region, and plastid trnK/matK were used to reconstruct the phylogeny of Montieae (Portulacaceae), and a new taxonomy for Montieae based on monophyly is proposed. Montieae consists of the sister clades Claytonia and Montia. In Claytonia, there is strong support for the following clades: sect. Limnia, all annuals except the perennials C. sibirica and C. palustris; sect. Rhizomatosae, high elevation or high latitude perennials with rhizomatous or caudicose growth habits; and sect. Claytonia, species with spheric or obconic underground perennation structures. All analyses recover clades of Montia circumscribed as sections Montiastrum, Australiensis and Montia. Heenan‚s australasian Neopaxia is placed robustly in Montia sect. Australiensis, a clade limited primarily to Australia and New Zealand. The ancestral area for Montieae is reconstructed as western North America. Beringian taxa of Claytonia sect. Rhizomatosae are derived from low latitude western North America ancestors adapted to persistently wet, alpine habitats. Although we infer that sect. Claytonia had multiple shifts to northern high latitudes and potentially to eastern North America from western North America, relationships among clades in this section have limited support. Habitat reconstructions show that the pleisiomorphic condition for moisture regime in sect. Claytonia is largely maintained over shifts in elevation/latitude.
S1073	G. Petersen;O. Seberg	2004	On the Origin of the Tetraploid Species Hordeum capense and H. secalinum (Poaceae)	Systematic Botany							The origin of two tetraploid species of Hordeum, H. capense from South Africa and H. secalinum from Eurasia and North Africa, is explored using phylogenetic analyses of two single-copy nuclear genes (DMC1 and EF-G) and one plastid gene (rbcL). By applying copy-specific primers it was possible to obtain sequence data from two copies of each of the nuclear genes from the two tetraploid species. The most parsimonious explanation of the presence of both genes is that each copy was inherited from different diploid parental species. Hence, H. capense and H. secalinum are allotetraploids. The phylogenetic analyses also demonstrated that the two species have a common hybrid origin involving diploid H. marinum subsp. gussoneanum and H. brevisubulatum. A gene tree derived from the plastid rbcL sequences showed that H. brevisubulatum was the maternal parent. Based on the number of evolutionary changes since polyploidization and subsequent diversification of the two species, the isolated occurrence of H. capense in South Africa is best explained as an ancient relic, as opposed to a recent introduction.
S1167	M. Popp;F. Eggens;P. Erixon;B. Oxelman	2004	Origin and evolution of a circumpolar polyploid species complex in Silene (Caryophyllaceae)	Systematic Botany							Phylogenetic analyses of two chloroplast and five putatively unlinked nuclear DNA regions were used to explore the evolutionary relationships of a circumpolar arctic polyploid species complex in Silene. Gene phylogenies inferred from introns in the low copy nuclear genes RPA2, RPB2, RPD2a, and RPD2b, and ITS1 and ITS2 from the nuclear ribosomal DNA region, indicate two consecutive polyploidization events. The first involved the diploid arctic/subarctic S. uralensis lineage as the cytoplasmic donor, as indicated by chloroplast rps16 and psbE-petL sequences, and highly unexpected based on morphology, the diploid Siberian/Northeast Asian S. ajanensis lineage as pollen donor. The hybridization and polyploidization resulted in the tetraploid S. involucrata lineage. A second hybridization and polyploidization with the S. ajanensis lineage as pollen donor, and the tetraploid S. involucrata lineage as cytoplasmic donor, resulted in the hexaploid lineages of S. sorensenis and S. ostenfeldii. In general, two paralogous sequences were identified from the tetraploids and three paralogues from the hexaploids in the low copy nuclear genes. Interlocus concerted evolution appears to have homogenized the ITS regions, because only the sequences corresponding to the paternal lineage were recovered in the polyploids. The power, and neccessity, of using several potentially unlinked regions is revealed by the fact that the gene phylogenies had small deviations from the general pattern explained by alloploidy. These deviations are better explained as gene duplication and/or lineage sorting events, or simply lack of information.
S1015	E. T. Riley-Hulting;A. Delgado-Salinas;M. Lavin	2004	Phylogenetic systematics of Strophostyles (Fabaceae): a North American temperate genus within a neotropical diversification	Systematic Botany							A combined parsimony analysis of cpDNA trnK, nrDNA ITS/5.8S, and morphology reveals that the genus Strophostyles is indeed monophyletic and comprises three species centered in eastern North America. In contrast to the conventional view of the geographic relationships of eastern North America, Strophostyles is nested within a primarily neotropical group. However, its sister is the South American genus Dolichopsis, which is endemic to the Chaco, a region characterized by having an annual frost interval. Strophostyles is apomorphically diagnosed by divergent stipules, persistent secondary floral bracts, calyces with four acute to sometimes attenuate lobes, and seed testae often with a cellular coat. Its sister relationship with Dolichopsis is supported in part by a shared keel petal morphology involving a gibbous ventral margin proximal to the rostrum. The three traditionally recognized species of Strophostyles are phenotypically and genetically distinct. Strophostyles peduncularis is the most genetically variable at the ITS locus and has a geographical distribution centered in southern Appalachia. The geographically most widespread S. helvolus shows the least amount of intraspecific genetic variation at this locus, suggesting recent and rapid range expansion throughout eastern North America. Nucleotide sequence variation is intermediate in Strophostyles leiosperma, a species distributed primarily in central North America.
S908	R. P. Roberts;L. E. Urbatsch	2004	Molecular phylogeny of Chrysothamnus and related genera (Asteraceae, Astereae) based on nuclear ribosomal 3' ETS and ITS sequence data	Systematic Botany	29	1					Established concepts of Chrysothamnus have been primarily based on morphological similarity or on molecular studies employing only exemplar taxa. Those investigations and treatments conceptualized Chrysothamnus as a single evolutionary unit with affinity for Ericameria, Petradoria, and Stenotus among other taxa. The hypotheses of relationship presented here are based on nuclear ribosomal 3¢ ETS and ITS data that were analyzed using several optimality criteria. The results indicate that Chrysothamnus as traditionally perceived is polyphyletic, with species placed in four well-supported lineages. Three of the four clades also contain taxa from other genera. Seven species of Chrysothamnus along with Acamptopappus, Amphipappus, Hesperodoria scopulorum, Tonestus lyallii, and Vanclevea constitute one clade, while four species aggregate in another clade that includes Hesperodoria salicina, Tonestus microcephalus, and T. peirsonii. A third lineage consists of Chrysothamnus gramineus and appears distantly related to any other Chrysothamnus. Finally, four species of Chrysothamnus recently transferred to Ericameria are strongly supported within the Ericameria lineage. Stenotus and Tonestus as traditionally circumscribed are not supported by the molecular data. Instead, the generitype of each is aligned with taxa other than species presently included within the same genus. The results of this investigation indicate that some of the morphological features used to delimit these genera may be the product of convergence, thus diminishing their value for phylogenetic reconstruction.
S1109	F. J. Rodriguez;L. Katinas;M. C. Tellería;J. V. Crisci	2004	Salcedoa gen. nov, a biogeographic enigma in the Caribbean Mutisieae (Asteraceae)	Systematic Botany	29	4					A new genus, Salcedoa, is described from the Cordillera Septentrional, northern Dominican Republic. The bilabiate florets, smooth style branches, caudate anthers, and pollen grains size and shape, exine structure and sculpture, and endoaperture shape place it close to the South American genera of the tribe Mutisieae (Asteraceae) centered in the Guayana Shield. Two morphology-based phylogenetic analyses, one using Gochnatia and the other using Chaetanthera as outgroups, and including Salcedoa and the 12 Guayanan genera were performed to determine the sister group relationships of Salcedoa. The results suggest that Salcedoa is sister to Gongylolepis. The unusual distributional pattern of Salcedoa and the Guayanan genera were explored through the dispersal-vicariance method. A trans-oceanic dispersal of fruits is postulated as a probable mechanism by which Salcedoa reached Hispaniola from a South American ancestor.
S1199	J. Roncal;C. E. Lewis;C. B. Asmussen;J. Francisco-Ortega	2004	Molecular phylogenetics of tribe Geonomeae (Arecaceae) using nuclear DNA sequences of phosphoribulokinase and RNA polymerase II	Systematic Botany							A phylogenetic analysis was performed including 46 species in all six genera of the Neotropical palm tribe Geonomeae (subfamily Arecoideae) and an outgroup composed of 14 species from the Arecoideae, two Ceroxyloideae, and one Phytelephantoideae. The analysis was based on two low-copy nuclear DNA sequences from the genes phosphoribulokinase and RNA polymerase II. The two data sets were analyzed separately and in combination. Our results added support to the previously reported monophyly of the tribe. The basal node of the tribe was polytomous containing the genera Welfia and Pholidostachys. Pholidostachys formed a monophyletic group. The currently accepted genera Calyptronoma and Calyptrogyne formed a well-supported clade with Calyptronoma resolved as paraphyletic with respect to Calyptrogyne. Geonoma formed a monophyletic assemblage and two main clades within this genus were resolved, which are ideal for future phylogenetic studies. Geonoma section Taenianthera was not monophyletic and a group of three high-elevation Geonoma species was resolved. We conclude that the two low-copy nuclear regions provided an independent and non-conflicting source of characters. Future simultaneous analysis of these and other ongoing molecular as well as morphological data will allow a discussion of morphological character state evolution and a formal infrageneric reclassification of the Geonomeae.
S1176	K. Ryall;J. Whitton;W. B. Schofield;S. M. Ellis;A. J. Shaw	2004	Molecular Phylogenetic Study of Infraspecific Variation in the Moss Isothecium myosuroides (Brachytheciaceae)	Systematic Botany							Isothecium myosuroides is an abundant and taxonomically problematic moss that occurs in Europe and on the west and east coasts of North America. It has sometimes been split into two taxa, I. myosuroides on the east coast of North America and in Europe, and I. stoloniferum on the west coast of North America. Isothecium stoloniferum has four distinct morphological types known as the ordinary, julaceous, coarse, and pinnate morphs. The degree to which the morphotypes are genetically distinct versus ecologically determined has been debated as has the distinction between I. stoloniferum and I. myosuroides, resulting in conflicting taxonomic treatments. This study uses phylogenetic analyses of the trnL-trnF and trnG regions of the chloroplast genome to examine relationships among the two species and four morphotypes. Molecular phylogenetic analyses reveal that there is some genetic basis to the morphs of I. stoloniferum, and that I. stoloniferum is paraphyletic. Accessions of I. myosuroides form a trans-Atlantic monophyletic group. The remaining samples form two distinct groups that each include samples of two morphotypes within I. stoloniferum. Populations of julaceous and ordinary morphotypes form a monophyletic group recognized as I. stoloniferum. Populations of coarse and pinnate morphotypes form an unresolved polytomy at the base of the clade that includes accessions of I. myosuroides.
S1055	G. Sancho	2004	Phylogenetic relationships in the genus Onoseris (Asteraceae,Mutisieae) inferred from morphology	Systematic Botany	29	2	432-447	10.1600/036364404774195610			Onoseris (Asteraceae, Mutisieae) is a genus of 31 species distributed from Mexico to Argentina through the Andes with most species occurring in Peru. A phylogenetic analysis was based on a detailed morphological study. Urmenetea is used as the outgroup. Three most parsimonious cladograms are obtained based on the complete data set using Paup 4.0b8. Two monophyletic groups are recognized: 1. Species with petiolate leaves, blades palmately veined blades with hastate base, and few-headed capitulescences, rarely thyrsoid capitulescences (O.acerifolia, O. alata, O. brasiliensis, O. cabrerae, O. castelnaeana, O. costaricensis, O. donnell-smithii, O. drakeana, O. fraterna, O. hastata, O. macbridei, O. onoseroides, O. peruviana, O. purpurea, O. sagittata, O. silvatica, and O. speciosa). 2. Species with sessile or subsessile leaves, elliptic and pinnately veined blades with attenuate base, and solitary capitula (O. albicans, O. amplexicaulis, O annua, O. chrysactinioides, O cumingii, O. gnaphalioides, O. humboldtiana, O.hyssopifolia, O.linearifolia, O. lopezii, O. minima, O. odorata, O. salicifolia, and O. weberbaueri). These monophyletic groups are recognized as subgenera:Onoseris and Hipposeris respectively. Onoseris salicifolia is chosen as the lectotype of Onoseris subg. Hipposeris Corolla polymorphism within Onoseris shows that corolla morphology alone cannot be used to distinguish between subtribes Mutisiinae and Gochnatiinae. Biogeographically, although Onoseris has a continuous distribution from Southern Andes to Northern Andes and Central America, but no individual species is disytributedon both sides of the Huancabamba zone. A group of species in subgenus Onoseris distributed in Central America and Brazil are regarded as phylogenetically derived (e.g. O. brasiliensis, O. costaricensis, O. onoseroides).
S1049	H. Schneider;S. J. Russell;C. J. Cox;F. Bakker;S. Henderson;F. Rumsey;J. Barrett;M. Gibby;J. C. Vogel	2004	Chloroplast phylogeny of asplenioid ferns based on rbcL and trnL-F spacer sequences (Polypodiidae, Aspleniaceae) and its implications for biogeography	Systematic Botany							Molecular phylogenies have been generated to investigate relationships among species and putative segregates in Asplenium, one of the largest genera in ferns. Of the ~700 described taxa 71 are included in a phylogenetic analysis using the chloroplast rbcL gene and the trnL-F spacer. Our results support Hymenasplenium as the sister lineage to all other asplenioid ferns, and all other putative satellite genera are nested within this asplenioid clade. Instead of the classical and well-recognized separation into Old and New World clades asplenioid ferns reveal a separation of the deeper branches into tropical and temperate clades. Temperate clades have evolved from tropical, more-basal clades and the phylogeny indicates up to six shifts between temperate and tropical preferences in the evolution of this widespread genus. Implications for speciation processes and biogeographic aspects including the re-colonization of temperate regions after the last glacial period are discussed and we present a phylogenetic framework from which the historical biogeography of asplenioid ferns can be inferred for Europe and North America.
S1001	L. M. Schultheis;M. J. Donoghue	2004	Molecular phylogenetic and biogeographic analyses of Ribes (Grossulariaceae) with an emphasis on gooseberries (subg. Grossularia)	Systematic Botany							Gooseberries are often distinguished from currants as a distinct genus (Grossularia) or subgenus (Ribes subg. Grossularia), but recent molecular phylogenetic analyses of chloroplast and nuclear data disagree as to the monophyly of this group. We report new sequence data from the 18-26S nuclear rDNA ITS and ETS regions and from the chloroplast psbA-trnH intergenic spacer that, in combination with previously reported data, suggest subg. Grossularia is monophyletic and nested within Ribes. Two main lineages are evident within subg. Grossularia, corresponding to the true gooseberries (subg. Grossularia sect. Grossularia) and a clade of glabrous-styled western North American gooseberries (subg. Grossularia sect. Robsonia, subg. Hesperia, Lobbia). Biogeographic analyses based on DIVA optimizations suggest a western North American origin for subg. Grossularia, with subsequent dispersal to east Asia giving rise to a well-supported clade of Asian gooseberry species in sect. Grossularia. This example contrasts with the well-documented pattern of dispersal from Asia to North America, and highlights the need to investigate additional groups distributed widely through the Northern Hemisphere.
S1195	A. J. Shaw;C. J. Cox;S. B. Boles	2004	Phylogeny, species delimitation, and sexual promoscuity in Sphagnum section Acutifolia	Systematic Botany							Nucleotide sequences for six nuclear loci and one chloroplast region were used to reconstruct phylogenetic relationships in Sphagnum section Acutifolia. The combined data matrix, which includes 136 accessions (129 ingroup taxa and seven outgroups) and 5126 nucleotide sites, was analyzed using Bayesian inference. Most of the individual morphospecies commonly recognized in the section were represented by multiple populations, in some cases by up to 16 accessions from throughout the Northern Hemisphere. Results of the combined seven-locus analysis resolved many of the species as monophyletic, but the deeper nodes were generally without support. Separate analyses of single-locus data sets revealed significant conflicts, indicating gene flow among both closely and more distantly related species within the section. The sequence data allowed likely parentage to be identified for several species of hybrid origin, and identified individual accessions that appear to be genetic admixtures. Taxonomic conclusions that can be made from the analyses include: 1. Sphagnum wulfianum and S. aongstroemii should both be included in section Acutifolia, 2. S. subtile cannot be separated from S. capillifolium, and the two should be synonymized, 3. S. capillifolium and S. rubellum each contain a monophyletic core of populations and should be retained as separate species, but 4. S. rubellum cannot be separated from S. andersonianum and S. bartlettianum and the three should be merged, 5. S. tenerum is highly differentiated from S. capillifolium and should be treated as a separate species, 6. inter-specific mixed ancestry is demonstrated for S. russowii (a likely allopolyploid), S. skyense, S. arcticum, and S. olafii. Interspecific recombination appears to be rather common in section Acutifolia, yet species, for the most part, maintain cohesiveness.
S1130	B. B. Simpson;J. A. Tate;A. Weeks	2004	On the value of the genus Hoffmannseggia (Caesalpinieae: Caesalpiniodeae: Leguminosae): Phylogeny and character evolution	Systematic Botany							For the last 150 years, Hoffmannseggia has been variously entangled with Caesalpinia and Pomaria. The confusion surrounding generic limits stemmed from the emphasis placed by workers on plant habit (herbaceous or subshrubby versus trees or stout vines) and armament (glandular trichomes versus spines). Traditionally, Hoffmannseggia consisted of herbaceous or subshrubby perennials that lack spines and usually bear glandular trichomes on portions of the vegetative surfaces. However, the lack of correspondence of other characters such as flower shape, fruit type, and sepal persistence with habit and armament led to the continual realignment of various species. Here, we show that many systematists of the mid-nineteenth century were misled by convergence in habit and trichome type. Our data, drawn from nuclear ITS, chloroplast trnL-trnF, and rbcL sequences show that, contrary to previous conclusions, Hoffmannseggia forms a monophyletic group supported with several morphological synapomorphies and that it is not closely related to either Caesalpinia or Pomaria. The species of the genus exhibit interesting patterns of character change and a complex phylogeny involving one documented case and other suspected cases of hybridization. We also make the new combination Hoffmannseggia pumilio.
S1050	R. L. Small	2004	Phylogeny of Hibiscus sect. Muenchhusia (Malvaceae) based on chloroplast rpL16 and ndhF, and nuclear ITS and GBSSI sequences	Systematic Botany							Hibiscus section Muenchhusia is a North American taxon with five species as recognized in the most recent taxonomic revision: H. coccineus, H. dasycalyx, H. grandiflorus, H. laevis, and H. moscheutos. To investigate the monophyly of Hibiscus section Muenchhusia, its relationship to other Hibiscus species, and the phylogenetic relationships among its species, DNA sequence data were obtained. To investigate the placement of section Muenchhusia within Hibiscus, chloroplast ndhF gene and rpL16 intron sequences were generated and added to a recently published dataset. To investigate relationships within section Muenchhusia three DNA sequence data sets were generated: a non-coding region of the chloroplast genome (rpL16 intron), nuclear ribosomal ITS, and a nuclear gene encoding granule-bound starch synthase (GBSSI). Analyses of ndhF + rpL16 data indicated that section Muenchhusia is indeed monophyletic and is embedded in a clade that includes representatives of Hibiscus section Trionum sensu lato plus other genera segregated from Hibiscus (Abelmoschus, Fioria), and the tribe Malvavisceae. Within section Muenchhusia little to no phylogenetically informative variation was detected in the ITS or rpL16 sequences. The GBSSI data, on the other hand, provided sufficient information to resolve relationships among species. The species of section Muenchhusia fall into two primary clades, one consisting of H. grandiflorus and H. moscheutos sensu lato, the other including H. coccineus, H. dasycalyx, and H. laevis. These phylogenetic data corroborate earlier biosystematic studies that also placed the species into these same two groups. Sequence polymorphism was observed in one accession each of H. dasycalyx and H. grandiflorus and resolution of the underlying alleles indicates that gene flow has occurred from H. moscheutos into both H. dasycalyx and H. grandiflorus.
S1091	J. F. Smith;S. B. Draper;L. C. Hileman;D. A. Baum	2004	A phylogenetic analysis within tribes Gloxinieae and Gesnerieae (Gesnerioideae: Gesneriaceae)	Systematic Botany							The evolution of floral symmetry in Asteridae has been of recent interest. Three genera with full or partial radial floral symmetry are found within tribes Gesnerieae and Gloxinieae of Gesneriaceae where the remaining taxa have bilaterally symmetric flowers. These tribes have been shown to each be monophyletic and form a close sister relationship to each other, but a full analysis within each tribe has not demonstrated strongly supported sister group relationships among genera, especially those with radially symmetrical flowers. To assess sister group relationships more accurately, a phylogenetic analysis using GCYC (a Gesneriaceae homolog of CYCLOIDEA) sequences as well as four regions from the chloroplast genome (ndhF, trnL intron, trnF-trnL spacer, rpl20-rps12 spacer), ITS, and two paralogues of the nuclear encoded chloroplast expressed glutamine synthetase was conducted. The analyses for the most part resolved sister group relationships between radial and bilateral taxa with strong support as well as provided support for several clades within Gloxinieae and indicated that Phinaea is not a monophyletic genus.
S995	J. R. Starr;S. A. Harris;D. A. Simpson	2004	Phylogeny of the unispicate taxa in Cyperaceae tribe Cariceae I: Generic relationships and evolutionary scenarios	Systematic Botany							Despite the controversy surrounding Cariceae generic and Carex subgeneric limits, most debates centre on a relatively small number of highly reduced unispicate taxa. This study examines Cariceae phylogeny by using all five genera (Schoenoxiphium, Kobresia, Uncinia, Carex, Cymophyllus) and four Carex subgenera (Primocarex, Vignea, Indocarex, Carex), with the emphasis of sampling on the tribe's taxonomically difficult unispicate groups (Uncinia, Cymophyllus, Kobresia pro parte, Carex subgenera Primocarex and Carex pro parte). Phylogenies based on rDNA internal and external transcribed spacer (ITS, ETS1f) sequences indicate that the tribe consists of four primary clades (((A, B) C) D) that support a fundamental split between dioecious and androgynous unispicate taxa. Dioecious species are related to multispicate species of either Carex subgenera Carex (Clade D) or Vignea (Clade C), whereas the androgynous species of Uncinia, Kobresia, Cymophyllus and Carex are related to multispicate species of Schoenoxiphium and Kobresia (Clades A and B). Trees strongly indicate that the genus Carex is artificial. Moreover, analyses support proposals to merge Carex subgenera Carex and Indocarex (Clade D), and they support the monophyly of Carex subgenus Vignea and the polyphyly of Carex subgenus Primocarex. Analyses also reject the common evolutionary link made between Schoenoxiphium and Carex subgenus Indocarex, and the belief that Schoenoxiphium and Kobresia should be merged. The monotypic genera Cymophyllus and Vesicarex do not warrant generic status. The implications of the phylogeny for tribal inflorescence evolution are discussed.
S1145	M. Stech	2004	Supraspecific Circumscription and Classification of Campylopus (Dicranaceae, Bryopsida) Based on Inferences from Sequence Data	Systematic Botany	29						The monophyly of Campylopus, and its relationships to other genera of the Dicranaceae-Campylopodioideae, especially Bryohumbertia and Pilopogon, have been ambiguous. To evaluate inter- and intrageneric relationships of Campylopus, maximum parsimony and maximum likelihood calculations of sequences from the chloroplast DNA (trnTUGU-trnLUAA spacer / trnLUAA 5´exon / trnLUAA intron, atpBˆrbcL spacer) and the nuclear ribosomal DNA (ITS1 / 5.8S / ITS2 / partial 26S) were performed. Analyses of the cpDNA sequences and the more conserved nrDNA parts (5.8S, partial ITS1, ITS2 and 26S) confirm the monophyly of a clade comprising the Campylopodioideae plus Leucobryum (Leucobryaceae), as proposed by previous molecular studies. Monophyly of Campylopus, including Bryohumbertia, and a sistergroup relationship to Pilopogon are also strongly supported by the cpDNA data. Relationships within Campylopus are only partially resolved due to low sequence variability in the cpDNA and homoplastic substitutions and indels. The present classification of Campylopus into three subgenera is not supported by the molecular trees, but further studies including a larger number of species and additional molecular markers are needed to clarify if the present morphological concept is inadequate.
S1010	F. J. Sun;S. R. Downie;R. L. Hartman	2004	An ITS-Based Phylogenetic Analysis of the Perennial, Endemic Apiaceae Subfamily Apioideae of Western North America	Systematic Botany							Phylogenetic analyses of 159 DNA sequences from the nuclear rDNA internal transcribed spacer region were conducted to evaluate the monophyly of the herbaceous, perennial genera of Apiaceae subfamily Apioideae endemic to North America (north of Mexico) and to determine the relationships of those elements that currently comprise Cymopterus within the group. The results of a previous phylogenetic study were equivocal in suggesting monophyly for these perennial, endemic taxa and revealed Cymopterus to be polyphyletic, with its species closely linked with those of Aletes, Lomatium, Musineon, Oreoxis, Orogenia, Podistera, Pseudocymopterus, Pteryxia, and Tauschia. Herein, we expand sampling to include comprehensive representation of Aletes, Cymopterus, Musineon, Oreoxis, Orogenia, Podistera, Pseudocymopterus, and Pteryxia and greater representation of Lomatium and Tauschia. We also include all members of two genera not examined previously, Glehnia and Oreonana, as well as additional outgroup genera from the Angelica clade of the apioid superclade. Our results indicate that the perennial, endemic apioid umbellifers of North America constitute a (weakly supported) monophyletic group, with Angelica and the meso-American Arracacia clade comprising two of several possible sister groups. The two subspecies of Glehnia littoralis ally with Angelica and Peucedanum japonicum; Oreonana shows affinity with several species of Cymopterus and Lomatium. The lack of resolution in the ITS trees precludes unambiguous hypotheses of relationship among these perennial, endemic umbellifers but does show that many of these genera, where resolved, are not monophyletic. Indeed, Cymopterus and Lomatium are highly polyphyletic and permeate all major clades resolved in the molecule-derived trees. Evidence from branch lengths and low sequence divergence suggests that that this group of North American umbellifers underwent rapid radiation, likely during the geoclimatic events of the Late Tertiary and Quaternary.
S1072	M. Thulin;M. Lavin;R. Pasquet;A. Delgado-Salinas	2004	Phylogeny and Biogeography of Wajira (Leguminosae): A Monophyletic Segregate of Vigna Centered in the Horn of Africa Region	Systematic Botany							Evidence from chloroplast trnK and nuclear ribosomal ITS sequences and morphological data reveals that the monotypic legume genus Wajira is nested within a clade comprising the species of Vigna subgen. Macrorhynchus. This Wajira-containing clade is basally branching in a larger clade that contains many of the genera traditionally referred to as tribe Phaseoleae subtribe Phaseolinae. Wajira is thus recircumscribed to include Vigna subgen. Macrorhynchus. Given the heterogeneity of floral morphology of its constituent species, Wajira now is apomorphically diagnosed by only its pollen brush, which comprises an introrse linear array of unicellular hairs. This recircumscribed genus now comprises five species, one of which is described as new, Wajira danissana. Three species require new nomenclatural combinations, Wajira grahamiana, Wajira praecox, and Wajira virescens. Parsimony analysis of the combined ITS and trnK sequence data weakly supports a sister relationship of the widespread W. grahamiana, which occurs in the Sudano-Zambezian Region, southern India, and Sri Lanka, with the remaining four species each narrowly distributed in the Somalia-Masai Region. Wajira grahamiana occurs in grasslands subjected to seasonal burning and has a thick and woody subterranean rootstock that resprouts herbaceous annual shoots. The four species of the Somalia-Masai clade are all woody climbers that occur in arid regions with sparse ground cover not subjected to seasonal burning. An evolutionary rates analysis of trnK sequences suggests that the Wajira stem clade diverged from its closest relatives about 10-12 million years ago, the extant diversification of the genus began around 5-6 million years ago, and Wajira grahamiana attained its widespread distribution well within the last 2 million years.
S1116	J. L. Trusty;R. G. Olmstead;D. J. Bogler;A. Santos-Guerra;J. Francisco-Ortega	2004	Using Molecular Data to Test a Biogeographic Connection of the Macaronesian Genus Bystropogon (Lamiaceae) to the New World : A Case of Conflicting Phylogenies	Systematic Botany	29		702-715				Bystropogon L‚Hér. (Lamiaceae) is endemic to the Macaronesian Islands and represents the best-known example of a putative phytogeographic connection between these islands and the New World. Previous morphological taxonomic studies suggested that this genus is closely related to the western South American Minthostachys (Benth.) Spach. Phylogenetic analyses of nucleotide sequences of the internal transcribed spacers and 5.8S subunit of nuclear ribosomal DNA and the trnL gene and trnL-trnF spacer of the chloroplast for 33 of the 72 genera in the Mentheae tribe were performed. Maximum parsimony analysis of the combined data set resulted in 63 most parsimonious trees. The strict consensus tree of this analysis shows with moderate bootstrap support (74%) that Bystropogon is sister to the Old World taxa Acinos Mill., Ziziphora L., and Clinopodium vulgare L. When analyzed separately, the ITS and trnL/F data sets do not agree as to the sister group to Bystropogon, although none support a sister relationship with Minthostachys. The cpDNA phylogeny strongly supports a relationship of Bystropogon with a clade of New World mint taxa (90% bootstrap value). Due to the apparent conflict between the chloroplast and nuclear characters observed in the phylogenies, we are not certain of the true biogeographic relationship of Bystropogon. Finally, in all analyses, all of the Mentheae genera sampled in this study form a monophyletic group (100% bootstrap value) and a derived clade of ten New World genera is found. These results contribute to our understanding of generic relationships within the tribe.
S1134	T. van der Niet;H. P. Linder;B. Bytebier;D. Bellstedt	2004	Molecular arkers reject monophyly of the subgenera of Satyrium (Orchidaceae)	Systematic Botany							Satyrium is a morphologically anomalous genus. Although clearly a member of the terrestrial orchid subfamily Orchidoideae, its phylogenetic relationships within the subfamily are uncertain. Morphologically it has always been placed in tribe Diseae, albeit associated with different subtribes, but recent molecular studies suggest a closer relationship to Orchideae. The infrageneric classification of Satyrium is equally problematic, and several different classifications are available. The only infrageneric classification based on a phylogenetic analysis of morphological characters resulted in recognition of the three subgenera Brachysaccium, Bifidum and Satyrium. DNA sequence data from nuclear (ITS1, 5.8S, and ITS2) and plastid (trnL intron, trnL-F intergenic spacer, and part of the matK gene and trnK intron) genome are used to test the monophyly of these subgenera. Topologies of cladograms resulting from parsimony analysis of separate datasets show several cases of incongruence, some of which are well supported. Combined analysis is performed on a dataset from which two problematic taxa are pruned. Parametric bootstrap, as well as Bayesian posterior probability, rejects monophyly of all three subgenera and alternative groupings are suggested.
S1043	S. J. Wagstaff;I. Breitwieser	2004	Phylogeny and Classification of Brachyglottis (Senecioneae, Asteraceae): an example of a rapid species radiation in New Zealand	Systematic Botany							Phylogenetic analyses of ITS and 5Åå trnK / matK spacer sequences were undertaken of 39 species representing the range of morphological variation in the genus Brachyglottis and putative outgroups. Independent analyses of the sequence data were largely congruent and when combined provided stronger support for relationships. The results suggest that Brachyglottis as currently circumscribed is paraphyletic. However, a more inclusive monophyletic group was supported that consists of the genera Bedfordia, Brachyglottis, Dolichoglottis, Haastia, and Traversia. Short branch lengths suggest there has been a spectacular adaptive radiation of the Brachyglottis alliance in recent times. The species are morphologically diverse and occupy a wide range of ecological niches in New Zealand, and yet exhibit very little sequence variation.
S1168	M. Whitson;P. S. Manos	2004	Untangling Physalis (Solanaceae) from the physaloids: a two-gene phylogeny of the Physalinae	Systematic Botany							Physalis (75+ species, Solanaceae) is most diverse in Mexico, with only the type, P. alkekengi, native to the Old World. Interspecific relationships are poorly known, and despite the distinctive inflated fruiting calyces, generic limits remain uncertain. Sequence data from part of the nuclear gene waxy (622 bp) and the internal transcribed spacer of the nrDNA (652 bp) were used to generate a phylogeny of subtribe Physalinae. Thirty-five species of Physalis and eight physaloid genera were sequenced. Data analysis included Bayesian and maximum parsimony methods. The Physalinae was monophyletic, but while the morphologically typical Physalis species formed a strongly supported clade, the morphologically atypical species made the genus paraphyletic. A grade of physaloid genera (Quincula, Oryctes, and Chamaesaracha) and Physalis subgenus Physalodendron separate P. alkekengi, P. carpenteri, and P. microphysa from other Physalis species. The monophyletic Physalis clade consists of Margaranthus and species with solitary yellow flowers and highly inflated calyces. Most sections of Physalis do not appear to be monophyletic. The Central American physaloid genera Brachistus, Leucophysalis viscosa, Tzeltalia, and Witheringia formed a clade at the base of the Physalinae.
S1163	K. Woods;K. W. Hilu;T. Borsch;J. H. Wiersema	2004	Pattern of variation and systematics of Nymphaea odorata: II. Sequence information from ITS and trnL-trnF	Systematic Botany							Sequence data from the nuclear internal transcribed spacer (ITS) and the plastid trnL-trnF regions were used to assess relationships between populations of N. odorata across its North American range, and to evaluate if subsp. odorata and subsp. tuberosa form distinct units. Since hybridization between N. mexicana and N. odorata is possible, the status of populations assigned to either species based on morphological characters was evaluated by using a more distant outgroup, subgenus Brachyceras. The ITS region revealed N. odorata to be monophyletic and sister to N. mexicana. Within N. odorata, polymorphic sites were detected, indicating possible hybridization between the subspecies. The geographic location of these hybrids suggests a possible hybrid zone. Overall, molecular evidence supports the segregation of subsp. odorata and subsp. tuberosa, with limited gene flow between the subspecies.
S1080	Y. M. Xia;W. J. Kress;L. M. Prince	2004	Phylogenetic analyses of Amomum (Alpinioideae: Zingiberaceae) using ITS and mat DNA sequence data	Systematic Botany							Comparative sequencing of the nuclear ribosomal Internal Transcribed Spacer (ITS) and the chloroplast matK coding and non-coding regions was used to examine the evolutionary relationships among 53 accessions representing 13 genera of the Zingiberaceae, including 31 accessions of Amomum (Alpinioideae). Phylogenetic analyses of the ITS and matK sequences alone and in combination using maximum parsimony methods produced a moderately supported topology within Alpinioideae. Our results indicated that Amomum as currently defined is polyphyletic with three major groups of species that do not correspond with any previously recognized sectional classification of the genus. Our analyses also identified Paramomum as sister to Elettariopsis, which are both embedded within one group of Amomum. The other two groups of Amomum share common ancestors with additional genera of the Alpinioideae. ITS and matK sequences provide new data for inferring relationships within Amomum and allow fresh interpretations of morphological characters (such as anther appendage and fruit type) that may be of value in future classifications.
S1266	C. Aedo;O. Fiz-Palacios;M. L. Alarcón;C. Navarro;J. J. Aldasoro	2005	Taxonomic revision of Geranium sect. Dissecta (Geraniaceae).	Systematic Botany	30	3	533-558	10.1600/0363644054782260			Geranium section Dissecta (Geraniaceae) consists of four species centered in Eurasia, between the Mediterranean region and the Himalaya Mountains. In contrast to the current literature, we consider G. chelikii, and G. davisianum to be synonyms of G. sintenisii, and G. pallens to be a synonym of G. asphodeloides. We also accept G. dissectum and G. crenophilum, the latter sometimes considered as subspecies of G. asphodeloides. A multivariate morphometric study provided some valuable characters for identification of these species. A multivariate morphometric study showed that some quantitative characters as deeply divided leaves, shorter and narrower petals, and shorter filaments clearly distinguished the annual G. dissectum. The characters contributing most to separation of the three remaining perennial species were petal width and the length of glandular hairs of stem and pedicels. In G. asphodeloides and G. dissectum the rootstock and stem base of has a most starch-rich parenchyma in the cortex, while in G. sintenisii and G. crenophilum the starch-rich parenchyma is mainly developed in the pith. A new key is provided, as well as new and detailed descriptions. Geranium crenophilum and G. sintenisii are here illustrated for the first time. Nine lectotypes and a neotype are designated, and distribution maps are presented. Analyses of the plastid trnL-trnF spacer, nuclear ITS sequences, and morphological data reveal that sect. Dissecta is strongly supported as monophyletic. In these analyses G. dissectum appeared as sister group of the rest of species.
S1265	D. C. Albach;T. Utteridge;S. J. Wagstaff	2005	Origin of Veroniceae (Plantaginaceae, formerly Scrophulariaceae) on New Guinea	Systematic Botany	30	2	412-423	10.1600/0363644054223666			Members of Veroniceae are one of the most prominent members of the alpine regions of New Guinea. Generic classification suggests at least three origins because species are divided into two species of Veronica, twelve species of Parahebe and the monotypic genus Detzneria. DNA sequence data (nr ITS-region, plastid trnL-F region) have been analyzed using parsimony and maximum likelihood to test the hypothesis of three different introductions to New Guinea and determine the origin of the introductions. The results largely confirm previous suggestions based on morphology, although lack of sufficient sequence variability in the Hebe complex does not allow definite conclusions. Veronica archboldii is closely related to the widespread alpine V. serpyllifolia from the Northern hemisphere. Parahebe vandewateri and P. albiflora are sisters and probably derived from New Zealand species, although not necessarily from species of Parahebe there. Finally, Detzneria tubata also belongs to the Hebe complex but has no clear affinities in this group. It may be a relict from the first immigration of Veronica species to the Southern hemisphere. Reasons for different success of the three groups in speciating in New Guinea is discussed in the light of the known vegetation history of New Guinea.
S1152	J. K. Archibald;M. E. Mort;A. D. Wolfe	2005	Phylogenetic relationships within Zaluzianskya (Scrophulariaceae s.s., tribe Manuleeae): classification based on DNA sequences from multiple genomes and implications for character evolution and biogeography	Systematic Botany	30	1	196-215	10.1600/0363644053661977			Zaluzianskya (Scrophulariaceae s.s., tribe Manuleeae) is a diverse genus of 55 species of annual and perennial herbs, endemic to southern Africa. This study used DNA sequence data from the nrDNA ITS-regions, rpl16, and trnL-trnF to produce the first broad phylogenetic hypotheses for Zaluzianskya, allowing the first tests of the monophyly of the genus and its sections, as well as an examination of character evolution. Reyemia nemesioides was placed within Zaluzianskya, with strong support. This is consistent with several morphological characteristics of both species of Reyemia. Sections Zaluzianskya and Holomeria are not monophyletic. The single species sampled from section Macrocalyx (Z. mirabilis) was nested within section Nycterinia according to the chloroplast and combined data, but placed sister to Nycterinia according to the ITS data. Several species do not form clades. Populations of Z. villosa and Z. gracilis were nested within a Z. affinis-clade while Z. divaricata was nested within a Z. pusilla-clade. Finally, populations of the sole day-flowering species within section Nycterinia, Z. microsiphon, were separated on the phylogenies. The source of this division is unknown but could be hybridization or convergent evolution via pollinator selection. Analyses suggest that the plesiomorphic condition for Zaluzianskya is annual, distributed within arid regions. Subsequent derivations of a perennial life history appear associated with distribution in relatively mesic regions.
S1343	C. A. Butterworth;R. S. Wallace	2005	Molecular phylogenetics of the leafy cactus genus Pereskia (Cactaceae)	Systematic Botany							Members of Pereskia exhibit some presumably plesiomorphic characters for the Cactaceae including shrubby habit, non-succulent or partially succulent leaves, and in some species, nearly superior ovaries. In addition, the members show a transition from perigynous flowers with half-inferior ovaries to those species having true receptacular epigyny (the predominant condition in the Cactaceae). To examine interspecific relationships within Pereskia we utilized cpDNA restriction-site data and sequences from two non-coding regions of the plastid genome - the psbA-trnH intergenic spacer and the rpl16 intron. Maximum parsimony and maximum likelihood analyses identified three major clades: a clade containing the widespread P. aculeata and the Andean species, a clade containing five species found primarily in eastern Brazil, and a third clade centered in southern Central America and the Caribbean. The relationship between these three clades and the rest of the Cactaceae remains unresolved, but our data do suggest that Pereskia may be paraphyletic. The sister taxon relationship for the yellow flowered species of Pereskia (P. aureiflora, P. guamacho ) was also confirmed, despite their widely disjunct distribution.
S1262	C. E. Edwards;D. E. Soltis;P. S. Soltis	2005	Molecular phylogeny of Conradina and other scrub mints (Lamiaceae) from the southeastern USA using nuclear ribosomal and plastid markers: Evidence for hybridization in Pleistocene refugia?	Systematic Botany							Conradina (Lamiaceae) consists of six allopatric species endemic to the southeastern United States, four of which are federally endangered or threatened. The limits and status of several taxa have been contested based on morphological grounds, and clarification of these limits is necessary for the design and implementation of effective and fiscally responsible protection and management plans. The objectives of this study were to investigate the monophyly of Conradina and its relationship to other related mints which are endemic to the southeastern United States, to understand the patterns of diversification in Conradina, and to clarify species relationships. A molecular phylogeny was inferred by sequencing ITS and plastid regions from multiple accessions of each species of Conradina and individuals from Clinopodium, Dicerandra, Piloblephis, Stachydeoma, Monarda, Pycnanthemum, and Mentha. ITS sequence data strongly support the monophyly of Conradina, in agreement with evidence from morphology. In contrast, plastid sequence data do not support a monophyletic Conradina and place Conradina as paraphyletic to Clinopodium, Stachydeoma, and Piloblephis spp. Similar plastid haplotypes are shared by different genera, perhaps due to shared ancestral polymorphisms, or more likely, introgression that occurred recently or during the Pleistocene. Within Conradina, ITS sequence data do not resolve species-level relationships, while plastid sequence data do not support the monophyly of most traditionally-defined species of Conradina that are distinguishable morphologically. Species-level relationships in the plastid data set may also be obscured by introgression or ancestral polymorphism. More rapidly evolving sequence data from nuclear markers will be necessary to clarify relationships in Conradina and related southeastern mints.
S1369	Y. Feng;S. Oh;P. S. Manos	2005	Phylogeny and Historical Biogeography of the Genus Platanus as Inferred From Nuclear and Chloroplast DNA	Systematic Botany	30						Phylogenetic analyses of DNA sequences of six species of Platanus were conducted to estimate species relationships and analyze biogeographic history. On the basis of a broader analysis of the third exon of the nuclear gene LEAFY, the root node for the genus was confirmed to fall between subg. Castaneophyllum (P. kerrii) and the species of subg. Platanus. Separate phylogenetic analyses of the nuclear ribosomal ITS region, the 3' region of the second intron of LEAFY, and the chloroplast region trnT-trnL intergenic spacer provided various levels of resolution, and the combined data yielded a fully resolved set of relationships within subg. Platanus. Two major clades were identified: one with species from Europe (EUR) and western North America (WNA) (P. orientalis, P. racemosa s.l.), the other with species from eastern North America (ENA; US and Canada) and eastern Mexico (EMEX) (P. mexicana, P. occidentalis, and P. rzedowskii). Within subg. Platanus, six subclades corresponded to previously recognized taxa, and one accession may be of hybrid origin. The historical biogeography of Platanus was interpreted using phylogenetic pattern, estimates of divergence times, the fossil record, and climate reconstructions. The pattern of relationships was consistent with a hypothesis of vicariance and the oldest divergence between taxa within the set of area relationships of ((WNA + EUR), (ENA + MEX)) suggested an initial barrier affecting taxa that are now mostly confined to North America. The second oldest divergence within subg. Platanus involves the intercontinental disjunction of semi-arid species from WNA + EUR which diverged by at least 15 MYBP, consistent with the Madrean-Tethyan hypothesis. Calibrated phylogenies were used to estimate divergence times for five more recent intracontinental disjunctions. These times correlated with the timing of geological events in southwestern North America and northern Latin America.
S1300	K. M. Fisher	2005	Monography and the PhyloCode: a practical example from the moss clade Leucophanella	Systematic Botany							Here I present a cladistically based monograph of a group of closely related mosses known as the Syrrhopodon involutus complex. Monographs remain a critical and indispensable component of systematics, but traditional monographic practices require some revisions if modern monographs are to truly reflect and incorporate phylogenetic understanding. I summarize the methods used to address issues relating to sampling and the formation of OTUs for this monograph, and emphasize the importance of incorporating morphological character data in a total evidence phylogenetic analysis. In addition to a traditional Linnaean taxonomic treatment, I provide rank-free definitions of the terminal taxa in the S. involutus complex. Following the PhyloCode recommendations for the designation and naming of more inclusive taxa, I present a novel method for naming terminal taxa as least-inclusive clades. This monographic treatment represents a first attempt at applying the PhyloCode at the terminal level in any plant group, and recognizes five distinct taxa in the S. involutus complex, which I have designated with the rank-free clade name Leucophanella: banksii, borneensis, involutus, rufescens, and revolutus.
S1319	B. A. Ford;M. Iranpour;R. F. C. Naczi;J. R. Starr;C. A. Jerome	2005	Phylogeny of Carex subg. Vignea (Cyperaceae) Based on non-coding nrDNA Sequence Data	Systematic Botany	31		70-82				Carex subg. Vignea is characterized by sessile, bisexual spikes, distigmatic flowers, and the lack of cladoprophylls. Phylogenies reconstructed using nrDNA internal and external transcribed spacer (ITS and ETS 1f) sequences for 100 vignean taxa support this subgenus as monophyletic. The atypical C. gibba is sister to all remaining taxa. A number of clades of the remainder of the subgenus do not correspond to easily defined morphological groups, with species representative of several disparate sections frequently contained within a single clade. Many traditionally recognized sections are not supported, although others such as sects. Ovales, Stellulatae, and Glareosae are monophyletic. Tree topologies suggest that gynaecandry has evolved multiple times in subg. Vignea. Species of uncertain subgeneric affinity are variously placed in our analysis. Carex fecunda, previously linked to subg. Vignea, is positioned within the outgroup composed of species traditionally placed in subg. Carex and Vigneastra. While species with highly compound inflorescences are often regarded as ancestral in Carex, our results suggest that this inflorescence type has evolved multiple times and is derived within the genus.
S1267	C. Gilbert;J. Dempcy;C. Ganong;R. Patterson;G. S. Spicer	2005	Phylogenetic relationships within Phacelia subgenus Phacelia (Hydrophyllaceae) inferred from nuclear rDNA ITS sequence data	Systematic Botany							We examined infrageneric relationships within Phacelia subgenus Phacelia based on phylogenetic hypotheses derived from internal transcribed spacers (ITS) and the 5.8S gene of nuclear ribosomal DNA. Maximum parsimony (MP) and maximum likelihood (ML) phylogenies support the monophyly of sects. Euglypta and Miltitzia, previously hypothesized based on seed characters and ecological distribution. Tree branching patterns within the Euglypta/Miltitzia clade indicate three principle lineages: 1) the P. pachyphylla complex, 2) a clade of P. brachyloba and 3) a clade consisting of two sister groups, the P. affinis complex and the P. fremontii complex. An aneuploid increase in chromosome number occurs from the P. pachyphylla complex (n = 11) to P. brachyloba (n = 12) while the pattern within the P. fremontii complex includes both aneuploid increases and decreases. There is high bootstrap support for monophyly of taxa representing both the P. magellanica polyploid complex and the P. humiles species group; the former contains the only known tetraploid taxa in subgenus Phacelia.
S1224	L. J. Gillespie;R. J. Soreng	2005	A Phylogenetic Analysis of the Bluegrass Genus Poa Based on cpDNA Restriction Site Data	Systematic Botany							Poa, with about 575 species, is the largest genus of grasses, and has diversified throughout temperate, boreal, and arctic regions, and similar habitats through the tropics. This new phylogenetic study of Poa based on analysis of restriction site data from PCR amplified regions of chloroplast DNA (trnT-trnF, trnF-trnV, trnV-rbcL, rbcL-ORF106, trnH-trnK) expands previous sampling in the genus to where 1/5 to 1/6 of the species have been characterized for chloroplast DNA types. A broad phylogenetic structure detected in a previous study using restriction site mapping of Poa chloroplast DNA gained additional and robust support. Accounting for extended intra- and extrageneric sampling, Poa remains monophyletic if Austrofestuca and Parodiochloa are included as sections within P. subg. Poa, and if Poa subg. Andinae is removed from the genus. Two new combinations are made: Poa sect. Austrofestuca and Poa sect. Parodiochloa. This new analysis supports the recognition of five major clades within Poa: 1) ArcSyl, Poa subg. Arctopoa sects. Arctopoa and Aphydris, and P. subg. Poa sect. Sylvestres; 2) BAPO, P. subg. Poa sects. (Bolbophorum + Alpinae) (Parodiochloa + Ochlopoa); 3) SPOSTA, P. subg. Poa sects. (Secundae (Pandemos (Orienos + Stenopoa + Tichopoa + Abbreviatae))); 4) PoM, P. subg. Poa sects. (Poa + Macropoa); 5) HAMBADD, P. subg. Poa sects. (Homalopoa, Acutifolae, Brizoides, Madropoa, Austrofestuca, Dasypoa, Dioicopoa, and informal groups „Punapoa‰ and „Australopoa‰). These clades diverge in the following arrangement from the outgroups: ArcSyl (BAPO (SPOSTA ((PoM) (HAMBADD))).
S1244	L. Goetsch;A. J. Eckert;B. D. Hall	2005	The Molecular Systematics of Rhododendron (Ericaceae): A Phylogeny based upon RPB2 Gene Sequences	Systematic Botany							Classification of Rhododendron species based on morphology has led to a consensus taxonomy recognizing the major subgenera Azaleastrum, Hymenanthes, Pentanthera, Rhododendron, Tsutsusi and three minor ones. To determine whether these subgenera are monophyletic and to infer phylogenetic relationships between Rhododendron sections and species, we carried out a cladistic analysis using molecular data, including all groups within the genus. For this purpose, we sequenced a large part of the nuclear gene RPB2-I, encoding a major RNA Polymerase II subunit, from 87 species and analyzed the data by maximum parsimony, maximum likelihood, and Bayesian methods. The resulting phylogenies show subgenera Azaleastrum and Pentanthera to be polyphyletic and group all Rhododendron species (except the two in section Therorhodion) into three large clades. Based upon these results, a modified system of Rhododendron classification is proposed, consolidating minor subgenera that are related and recognizing monophyletic subgenera.
S1366	A. Guggisberg;F. Bretagnolle;G. Mansion	2005	Allopolyploid origin of the Mediterranean endemic, Centaurium bianoris (Gentianaceae), inferred by molecular markers	Systematic Botany							Centaurium bianoris (Gentianaceae) is restricted to Majorca, the main island of the Balearic Archipelago. This tetraploid species is characterised by salmon-coloured corollas (var. bianoris), but pink (var. roseum) and yellow (var. sulfureum) varieties have also been described. An allopolyploid origin has been proposed between the diploids C. maritimum (yellow flowers) and C. tenuiflorum var. acutiflorum (pink flowers), both occurring on Majorca and in other places of the Mediterranean basin. In this study, we tested the proposed hybrid origin of C. bianoris by using RAPD fingerprinting and both direct and cloned sequences of the nuclear ribosomal ITS, and the chloroplast trnLF regions. Our molecular data confirmed the assumption of an allotetraploid origin of C. bianoris via hybridisation between C. tenuiflorum and C. maritimum, the latter being the maternal parent. Moreover, the so-called varieties roseum and sulfureum appeared to be only floral morphs that may have arose via genomic processes such as gene silencing. Hybridisation is probably the cause of the ITS sequence polymorphism observed in C. bianoris, whereas backcrosses with either parent may be responsible for the apparent bidirectional homogenisation observed in ITS clones. Finally, the polyphyletic behaviour of C. bianoris on the ITS cladogram, combined with the differential rates of homogenisation observed in ITS sequences, may denote a recurrent origin for that taxon. This result contrasts with the narrow distribution of C. bianoris, compared to that of its diploid parents, suggesting instead a single origin for this hybrid.
S1330	A. K. Hansen;L. E. Gilbert;B. B. Simpson;S. R. Downie;A. C. Cervi;R. K. Jansen	2005	Phylogenetic relationships and chromosome number evolution in Passiflora	Systematic Botany							The phylogenetic relationships and chromosomal evolution of the diverse tropical genus Passiflora (Passifloraceae) are explored using data from two chloroplast markers: the rpoC1 intron and the trnL/trnT spacer region. A survey of the presence or absence of the rpoC1 intron in 136 species representing 17 of Killip‚s (1938) 22 subgenera of Passiflora and four other genera in the Passifloraceae revealed intron losses in 46 taxa. A minimum of two losses were confirmed by a parametric bootstrap approach on sequence data from the trnL/trnT chloroplast non-coding region for 61 taxa. The results of phylogenetic analyses of the trnL/trnT sequence data support the reduction of Killip‚s 22 subgenera to four as proposed in a new classification system by Feuillet and MacDougal (2004). The monophyly of the Œx=6‚ and Œx=9‚ chromosomal and morphological groups is strongly supported. In addition, these data indicate that Passiflora biflora, or closely related species, is the likely continental sister to the red-flowered Caribbean taxa, while P. auriculata is weakly supported as the New World sister to the Old World Passifloras. Finally, character optimization of chromosome numbers on the phylogenetic tree supports x=12 as the base chromosome number for Passiflora.
S1212	M. G. Harrington;K. J. Edwards;S. A. Johnson;M. W. Chase;P. A. Gadek	2005	Phylogenetic inference in Sapindaceae sensu lato using plastid matK and rbcL DNA sequences	Systematic Botany	30	2					Phylogenetic relationships within Sapindaceae sensu lato are assessed using sequence data from two plastid genes, analyzed separately and together. A total of 46 rbcL sequences (31 of which are new), and 89 matK sequences (75 new) representing 64 genera were subjected to parsimony and Bayesian analysis. The results support three major lineages, relationships between which are only weakly supported. Xanthoceras sorbifolium is not clearly a member of any of these lineages, and there is some support for it being the first lineage to diverge within the entire assemblage. Support for a broadly defined Sapindaceae incorporating Aceraceae, Hippocastanaceae and Xanthoceras is very robust. A division into four subfamilies is proposed: Sapindoideae (including Koelreuteria and Ungnadia); Hippocastanoideae (including taxa previously referred to Aceraceae and Hippocastanaceae, plus Handeliodendron); a more narrowly defined Dodonaeoideae; and a monotypic Xanthoceroideae. Tribal groupings are critically evaluated in light of the analyses. Although many of the current tribes appear paraphyletic or polyphyletic, there is support for the monophyly of some core groups of genera that suggest realignments of tribal concepts that would render them more informative of relationships
S1378	S. B. Janssens;K. Geuten;Y. M. Yuan;Y. Song;P. Küpfer;E. Smets	2005	Phylogenetics of Impatiens and Hydrocera (Balsaminaceae) using chloroplast atpB-rbcL spacer sequences	Systematic Botany							Balsaminaceae are a morphologically diverse family with ca. 1,000 representatives that are mainly distributed in the Old World tropics and subtropics. To understand the relationships of its members, we obtained chloroplast atpB-rbcL sequences from 86 species of Balsaminaceae and five outgroups. Phylogenetic reconstructions using parsimony and Bayesian approaches provide a well-resolved phylogeny in which the sistergroup relationship between Impatiens and Hydrocera is confirmed. The overall topology of Impatiens is strongly supported and is geographically structured. Impatiens likely originated in South China from where it colonized the adjacent regions and afterwards dispersed into North America, Africa, India, the Southeast Asian peninsula and the Himalayan region.
S1203	J. H. Kirkbride Jr	2005	A phylogeny of CucumisÀúCucumella (Cucurbitaceae) based on morphological characters	Systematic Botany	30						A phylogenetic hypothesis was developed for the 44 Cucumis˜Cucumella species using 122 morphological characters. Oreosyce africana and Mukia maderaspatana served as the outgroup. The qualitative characters alone yielded a more resolved hypothesis than the qualitative and quantitative characters combined. Cucumis was polyphyletic, and Cucumella paraphyletic, sensu Farris. The Cucumella species are transferred to Cucumis, making it a monophyletic group. When the Cucumis˜Cucumella species were reanalyzed with the known hybrid Cucumis ◊ hytivus, it had little affect on the phylogenetic hypothesis, and its hybridity and parentage could not be deduced from the results.
S1242	D. H. Les;M. L. Moody;S. W. L. Jacobs	2005	Phylogeny and Systematics of Aponogeton (Aponogetonaceae): The Australian Species	Systematic Botany							Aponogeton is an important genus whose species are cultivated widely as ornamental aquatic plants. Although a fairly recent monograph has been published, the genus remains poorly studied systematically. We conducted a phylogenetic survey of Aponogeton that focused on relationships among the nine native Australian species as well as their relationship to other members of the genus. Our analyses included a phylogenetic assessment of morphological characters and molecular data obtained both from chloroplast (trnK 5' intron, matK) and nuclear DNA (nrITS) loci. Molecular data provided evidence of hybridization and polyploidy as well as an informative overview of interspecific relationships in the genus. Two potentially new Australian species also were identified by the molecular data. Combined molecular data produced a well-resolved cladogram that enabled us to evaluate previous phylogenetic hypotheses based on non-explicit methods as well as the soundness of the existing classification of the genus. We conclude that Aponogetonaceae originated in Australia and subsequently radiated into Africa, Madagascar, and Asia, from which a secondary Australian diversification occurred resulting in a biphyletic origin of the native Australian species. A pattern of morphological distinctiveness coupled with low molecular divergence indicates relatively recent and rapid speciation of Aponogeton in Australia. Our results also demonstrate that in this group, morphological data are extremely unreliable taxonomically due to their extensive homoplasy. The phylogenetic relationships elucidated by this study provide evidence to support the establishment of two additional sections, Flavida and Viridis, which are described.
S1250	M. Luckow;R. H. Fortunato;S. Sede;T. Livshultz	2005	The phylogenetic affinities of two mysterious monotypic mimosoids from southern South America	Systematic Botany							Two monotypic genera of Mimosoideae from southern South America, Mimozyganthus and Piptadeniopsis, have been particularly difficult to classify and there has been disagreement about their relationships to other legume genera. We undertook a phylogenetic study based on molecular data from the chloroplast and nucleus, and synthesized it with new data from morphology, cytology, and palynology, in order to determine where these genera belong in the mimosoid phylogenetic tree. Mimozyganthus, an enigmatic genus whose unique morphology led workers to consider it transitional between the subfamilies Mimosoideae and Caesalpinioideae, is instead nested among the higher mimosoids on the molecular tree. Careful evaluation of the characters that were considered to be caesalpinioid-like reveals that they are not identical and are independently derived. Piptadeniopsis is most closely related to Prosopidastrum, a primarily Argentinian genus with lomentiform fruits. This is in close agreement with most morphological characters, although the pollen is different in the two genera. Piptadeniopsis, Mimozyganthus, and Prosopidastrum form a monophyletic group on all molecular trees, a result consistent with vegetative and fruiting morphology, but not floral characters. Although the relationship of this group to other taxa is unresolved in the individual molecular analyses, a combined analysis of all molecular data for a subset of the taxa reveals that the three taxa are more closely related to the Leucaena group than to Prosopis. We hypothesize that the unique floral characters of Mimozyganthus may have evolved in response to pollinator selection, and a pollination study is needed to test this hypothesis.
S1191	T. R. Martins;T. J. Barkman	2005	Reconstruction of Solanaceae phylogeny using the nuclear gene SAMT	Systematic Botany	30	2	435-447				The nuclear gene SAMT˜salicylic acid methyltransferase˜is a novel phylogenetic marker that was isolated using RT-PCR in order to estimate intergeneric relationships within the Solanaceae. SAMT catalyzes the formation of the volatile compound methyl salicylate, which is an important secondary metabolite for both pathogen defense and floral fragrance in this family. Relationships inferred with SAMT cDNA sequences are mostly congruent with previous cpDNA estimates, which not only increases our confidence in Solanaceae phylogeny, but it suggests that paralogy and lineage sorting appear not to be severe for this nuclear gene at this phylogenetic level. Relationships observed with SAMT include Schizanthus as sister to the rest of the family. The second branch was Schwenckioideae + Cestroideae. The final two lineages were Petunioideae sister to the X = 12 clade, which includes Nicotianoideae + Solanoideae. Although mostly congruent, one important phylogenetic difference between previous cpDNA and nuclear SAMT phylogenetic estimates is noted. Nicandra and Exodeconus are not supported as sister taxa; rather, Exodeconus is near the base of the Solanoideae while Nicandra appears to belong to a lineage that includes Physalis, Capsicum, Solanum, and Datura. The results obtained in this study indicate that expanded sampling of taxa for SAMT and the study of additional nuclear gene sequences in conjunction with cpDNA will be valuable towards improving our understanding of Solanaceae phylogeny.
S1358	L. A. McDade;T. F. Daniel;C. A. Kiel;K. Vollesen	2005	Phylogenetic Relationships Among Acantheae (Acanthaceae): Major Lineages Present Contrasting Patterns of Molecular Evolution and Morphological Differentiation	Systematic Botany	30	4					We used DNA sequence data from four regions ([1] nrITS; the chloroplast [2] rps16 intron, [3] trnG-S spacer, and [4] trnL-F intron and spacer) to study phylogenetic relationships within tribe Acantheae (Acanthaceae). Our sample includes 18 of 20 recognized genera and 82 of ca. 500 species (plus two Justicieae as out-groups). Results of parsimony and Bayesian analyses were entirely congruent and provided strong support for monophyly of two sub-lineages of Acantheae, referred to here as the Œone-lipped corolla‚ and Œtwo-lipped corolla‚ lineages, reflecting notable differences in corolla morphology. Subsequent analyses were of the two sublineages separately in order to include all characters (a hypervariable region of trnG-S could not be aligned across the full range of taxa but could be aligned within sublineages). The Œone-lipped corolla lineage‚ comprises six clades of Old World taxa related as follows: [Crossandra (Sclerochiton clade {Cynarospermum [Blepharis (Acanthus clade + Acanthopsis)]})]. All presently recognized genera are strongly supported as monophyletic, except that Blepharis dhofarensis is placed with species of Acanthus, with strong support from both parsimony and Bayesian inference (monophyly of Blepharis was rejected by both parsimony and likelihood). Alternate hypotheses based on calyx and androecial morphology regarding Crossandrella and Streptosiphon could not be rejected, but placement of these genera with some species of Crossandra based on pollen was rejected. The Œtwo-lipped corolla lineage‚ is strongly supported and includes one clade of Old World plants (the Stenandriopsis clade) that is sister to a strongly supported clade that includes all New World Acantheae as follows: [Stenandrium clade (Neriacanthus {Aphelandra lineage})]. The Aphelandra lineage includes the Œarmed‚ Aphelandra clade and a polytomy of six unresolved clades: (1) A. squarrosa, (2) Encephalosphaera clade, (3) Geissomeria clade, (4) A. aurantiaca clade, (5) A. pulcherrima clade, (6) Rhombochlamys. In contrast to patterns in the one-lipped lineage, genera in the two-lipped lineage are mostly not monophyletic nor are relationships among them strongly supported by our molecular data or by morphological synapomorphies. We discuss these results in the context of evidence from other sources including macromorphology, palynology, chromosome numbers, and geographic distribution.
S1368	A. W. Meerow;J. Francisco-Ortega;D. N. Kuhn;R. J. Schnell	2005	Phylogenetic Relationships and Biogeography within the Eurasian Clade of Amaryllidaceae Based on Plastid ndhF and nrDNA ITS Sequences: Lineage Sorting in a Reticulate Area?	Systematic Botany							The monophyletic Eurasian clade of Amaryllidaceae was analyzed using plastid ndhF and rDNA ITS sequences for 33 and 29 taxa, respectively, representing all genera by at least one species. Both maximum parsimony and Bayesian analysis were used on each data set and the combined data. Both sequence matrices resolve the Central and East Asian tribe Lycorideae as sister to the Mediterranean-centered genera of the clade, and recognize two large subclades within the greater Mediterranean region: Galantheae, consisting of Acis, Galanthus and Leucojum; and Narcisseae (Narcissus and Sternbergia)/Pancratium. However, there are areas of incongruence between the ndhF and ITS trees. When three predominantly monotypic genera, Hannonia, Lapiedra, and Vagaria, centered in North Africa, are removed from the alignments, the two sequence matrices produce fully congruent topologies with increased support at many of the nodes, with ILD between partitions rising from P = 0.07 to 0.96. We hypothesize that lineage sorting took place after the divergence of Galantheae and Narcisseae/Pancratium from a common genepool of which Hannonia, Lapiedra, and Vagaria have retained a mosaic of the ancestral haplotypes. We also performed dispersal-vicariance analysis to reconstruct biogeographic scenarios on the generic level phylogenies found with and without these three genera included, as well as on a species-level phylogeny of Galantheae. The results of the dispersal-vicariance analysis are discussed in the context of the complex biogeographic history of the Mediterranean basin.
S1258	P. M. Moline;H. P. Linder	2005	Molecular phylogeny and generic delimitation in the Elegia group (Restionaceae, South Africa) based on a complete taxon sampling and four DNA chloroplast markers	Systematic Botany							The <i>Elegia</i> group comprises 60 species of African Restionaceae, a large and ecologically dominant element of the Cape flora of South Africa. The recognition of the group was based upon the shared possession of unbranched fertile culms, the presence of a distinct abscission line at the base of the leaf sheaths, and anthers that are included at anthesis. The taxonomy of the group has been problematic, and every monographer of the group used different generic delimitations. Based upon a cladistic analysis of sequence data from multiple chloroplast markers (<i>trnL-F</i> region, <i>atpB-rbcL</i> spacer, <i>trnK</i> intron, <i>matK</i>, and <i>rbcL</i>) for all 60 species, we seek optimal generic groupings that are monophyletic, conservative nomenclaturally, and readily diagnosable using morphological characters. We find no support for the monophyly of the <i>Elegia</i> group, as the genus <i>Askidiosperma</i>, itself forming a clade of 12 species, falls outside the group. Within the remaining elements we find no acceptable generic groupings, consequently we propose an expanded circumscription of <i>Elegia</i> that includes the genera <i>Chondropetalum</i> and <i>Dovea</i>, as these latter two genera are embedded within the former. New combinations are <i>E. acockii, E. aggregata, E. decipiens, E. ebracteata, E. hookeriana, E. marlothii, E. microcarpa, E. recta, E. tectorum, E. macrocarpa</i>.
S1273	D. S. Penneys;W. S. Judd	2005	A systematic revision and cladistic analysis of Charianthus (Melastomataceae) using morphological and molecular characters	Systematic Botany	30						In this paper we present a revision of Charianthus, which represents the first genus in the Miconieae (Melastomataceae) to be the subject of a combined molecular and morphological cladistic analysis. Charianthus is a morphologically well-characterized clade of six species of hummingbird pollinated shrubs and small trees found in the tropical montane rain forests and elfin forests of the Lesser Antilles. Analysis of the internal transcribed spacer (ITS) region of 18S - 26S nuclear ribosomal, combined with morphological data, resulted in a strongly supported Charianthus clade. Charianthus fadyenii was placed in the Tetrazygia clade where its position as sister to T. bicolor is strongly supported. Inclusion of C. fadyenii in Charianthus renders both Charianthus and Tetrazygia non-monophyletic, therefore, this species has been transferred to Tetrazygia. Charianthus purpureus, as defined by earlier taxonomists, is a polyphyletic species because of the inclusion of morphologically distinctive populations on the islands of Dominica and Grenada; thus, two new species, C. dominicensis and C. grenadensis, have been described, based on the results presented herein. The revised circumscription of Charianthus renders it the only vascular plant genus endemic to the Lesser Antilles.
S1405	V. Plana;R. M. Bateman;J. J. F. E. d Wilde	2005	Morphological and molecular cladistic analysis of the fleshy-fruited African sections of Begonia	Systematic Botany							The 26% of African Begonia species that possess distinctive dehiscent or indehiscent, non-winged fleshy fruits (59% of the world total of fleshy-fruited begonias) are traditionally assigned to four sections; 73% of these species occur in section Tetraphila, concentrated in Central and West Africa. All 34 species of sections Baccabegonia, Squamibegonia and Tetraphila, plus two outgroups, were coded into an initially broad morphological matrix that was eventually reduced to 27 bistate, multistate, and meristic characters well distributed across the body of the plant. A representative subset of 23 ingroup and two outgroup species was also analyzed for DNA sequences of nrITS and the plastid trnL intron. Parsimony trees generated from ITS and trnL showed good congruence, and although each was statistically incongruent with the morphology-only trees, the areas of incongruence were poorly supported, so the three matrices were later combined to maximize confidence in the ensuing interpretations. The morphology-only analysis demonstrated that eliminating polymorphic characters greatly reduced resolution, also suggesting that earlier culling of potentially useful but problematic characters may have been overly rigorous. All three sets of trees identified as unequivocally monophyletic the fleshy-fruited African begonias, sections Baccabegonia and Squamibegonia (reliably placed as sisters), and the „core‰ members of section Tetraphila. The main sources of instability were B. longipetiolata and B. loranthoides, which were placed by morphology within core Tetraphila, by trnL as sisters to core Tetraphila, and by ITS (and the combined analysis) as sisters to sections Baccabegonia plus Squamibegonia. As this clade is not readily diagnosed by morphology, a pragmatic decision was taken to continue to recognize a putatively paraphyletic traditional circumscription of section Tetraphila. The combined analysis revealed moderately to weakly supported groups within core Tetraphila that share only a few morphological synapomorphies and have some geographical and/or ecological cohesion; they reflect a bona fide, non-recent evolutionary radiation. Comparison with several other morphological cladistic analyses of Begonia allows generalizations regarding character coding, and shows that the strongest phylogenetic signal is provided by floral characters traditionally employed in the taxonomy of Begonia. Evolutionary patterns in the group are interpreted in terms of pollinatiom and dispersal syndromes (notably endozoochory) and ecological shifts. Island-based giantism and polyploidy are also evident, as is a strong biogeographic overprint.
S1290	T. Scharaschkin;J. A. Doyle	2005	Phylogeny and Historical Biogeography of Anaxagorea (Annonaceae) Using Morphology and Non-Coding Chloroplast Sequence Data	Systematic Botany							The Annonaceae are a pantropical angiosperm family, in which Anaxagorea is sister to the rest of the family based on previous phylogenetic studies. Anaxagorea is the only genus of Annonaceae with a disjunct distribution in South and Central America and southeast Asia. Earlier arguments on the biogeographic history of Annonaceae led to the hypothesis of a Laurasian origin for Anaxagorea. A detailed phylogenetic study was conducted using 75 morphological characters and molecular sequences from the atpB-rbcL, psbA-trnH, and trnL-trnF spacer regions and the trnL intron. Molecular analyses alone do not support the monophyly of the Asian species, but the morphological and combined molecular and morphological analyses do. All analyses place most Central American species in a clade, but none support an Asian-Central American clade. South American species form a basal grade, thereby refuting the hypothesis of a Laurasian origin for the genus and indicating instead a Gondwanan origin. Parsimony optimizations and DIVA reconstructions of biogeographic data indicate separate dispersals from South America to Central America and to Asia. Molecular age estimates indicate an Eocene origin for the genus. The clade containing the Asian and Central American species is dated to be younger than the Oligocene climatic deterioration, which reduces the plausibility of the North Atlantic land bridge as a dispersal route from South America to Asia.
S1297	M. C. Simurda;D. C. Marshall;J. S. Knox	2005	Phylogeography of the narrow endemic, Helenium virginicum (Asteraceae), based upon ITS sequence comparisons	Systematic Botany							The federally listed threatened species, Helenium virginicum, is endemic to 30 sinkhole ponds in two counties in Virginia, but a Helenium population in Pomona, Missouri, differs scarcely from H. virginicum from Virginia in morphology, ecology, and non-coding nrDNA ITS sequences. In response to continuing taxonomic uncertainty regarding the Missouri population, we enlarged our ITS comparisons from our previous work to include 48 populations, more than doubling the number of H. virginicum populations, and including populations of H. autumnale and H. flexuosum from 12 states in the United States and two Canadian provinces. Phylogenetic analyses were conducted using Bayesian, maximum-likelihood, and maximum-parsimony methods, and showed strong support for a monophyletic species of all H. virginicum from Virginia, the Pomona population and 29 other recently discovered populations in Missouri. We conclude that H. virginicum is narrowly endemic and disjunct between Virginia and Missouri. Additionally, one population of H. autumnale from the Bruce Peninsula, Canada, was found to be the sister group to H. virginicum. We discuss the impact of Pleistocene and Holocene geoclimatic changes on the phylogeography of these plants, including the possibility that the H. autumnale complex has become more disjunct and narrowly endemic since the Xerothermic Period (8-4Ka).
S1364	R. D. Stone	2005	Phylogeny of major lineages in Melastomataceae, subfamily Olisbeoideae: utility of nuclear glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GapC) gene sequences	Systematic Botany							Here I present evidence for phylogenetic relationships in pan-tropical Melastomataceae, subfamily Olisbeoideae based on combined exon and intron sequences of the nuclear glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase gene. Parsimony and maximum-likelihood analyses yielded a well-supported ingroup tree consistent with earlier morphologically based concepts of six genera ˆ Memecylon, Mouriri, Votomita, Spathandra, Lijndenia, and Warneckea. The position of the root node in Olisbeoideae remains equivocal. Outgroup-rooted maximum parsimony suggests a deep divergence between Old and New World lineages, while the maximum-likelihood rooting resolved paleotropical genera as a paraphyletic grade basal to the neotropical taxa. The Fitch optimization method for estimating character evolution consistently inferred the strongly acrodromous leaf venation pattern as ancestral in Olisbeoideae, which reinforces the conclusion that the superficially uninervate or brochidodromiform venation pattern of Memecylon, the neotropical subclade, and some Lijndenia and Warneckea species is best interpreted as a series of independent losses of the strongly acrodromous condition. Genomic GapC sequences may have phylogenetic utility at intergeneric level in other angiosperm families, particularly those that have low apparent rates of chloroplast DNA sequence evolution.
S1252	F. Tronchet;G. M. Plunkett;J. Jeremie;P. P. L. Ii	2005	Monophyly and major clades of Meryta (Araliaceae)	Systematic Botany							Phylogenetic analyses of nuclear ribosomal ITS and ETS sequences yield considerable improvements in our knowledge of relationships, character evolution, and biogeography in Meryta (Araliaceae). This genus comprises ca. 30 species, all of which share simple leaves and a dioecious sexual system, a unique combination in Araliaceae. Meryta is distributed widely across the Pacific, but each of its species is endemic to only one or a few islands. Previous phylogenetic studies have included only a very limited number of exemplars from Meryta, but have suggested that the genus is related to the Southwest Pacific clade of Schefflera within the larger Polyscias-Pseudopanax group of Araliaceae. Our data confirm this previous placement and provide evidence for the monophyly of Meryta. There is no support for the recognition of three segregate genera, Botryomeryta, Schizomeryta, and Strobilopanax. Within Meryta, we have identified two major clades, one that unites the species from Fiji and New Zealand (both of old geological origin), and a second, „Northern Arc clade‰ comprising the remaining species of Meryta. In this second clade, several subclades of New Caledonian species can be recognized, along with a „Volcanic Islands subclade.‰ The presence of species in New Caledonia, Fiji, and New Zealand, together with the placements of these species in the phylogenetic trees, is suggestive of an ancient vicariance, whereas the distribution of the members of the Volcanic Islands subclade appears to be best explained by a series of long-distance dispersal events, most likely from New Caledonia.
S1263	O. Werner;J. A. Jimenez;R. M. Ros;M. J. Cano;J. Guerra	2005	Preliminary investigation of the systematics of Didymodon (Pottiaceae, Musci) based on nrITS sequence data	Systematic Botany	30						A phylogenetic analysis of species of Didymodon from the Mediterranean area, Macaronesia, and Southwestern and Central Asia is presented. The ITS1 - 5.8S rRNA gene and ITS2 for 30 species have been sequenced, which represent about 25% of the recognized species in the genus. The molecular data confirm the monophyly of Didymodon as clearly separated from Barbula. The transfer of Didymodon giganteus to Geheebia, of D. sinuosus to Oxystegus, and to Trichostomopsis is not supported by the molecular data. The phylogenetic affinities of the species generally do not correspond with the infrageneric classification proposed for the genus based on morphological characteristics. The only monophyletic section is Asteriscium, but only after the inclusion of D. bistratosus.
S1326	J. B. Whittall;M. L. Carlson;R. J. Meinke;A. Liston	2005	The Mimulus moschatus Alliance (Phrymaceae): Molecular and Morphological Phylogenetics and their Conservation Implications	Systematic Botany							The Mimulus moschatus alliance consists of thirteen morphologically similar species, the majority of which have been considered for conservation protection. Phylogenetic analyses of four rapidly evolving molecular DNA regions (ITS, ETS, trnL-F, and rpl16) and a morphological data set under several optimality criteria reveal that the M. moschatus alliance is composed of three geographically defined clades: the Sierra Nevada Clade (M. floribundus, M. norrisii and M. dudleyi), the Snake River Clade (M. hymenophyllus, M. ampliatus and M. patulus) and the Columbia River Clade (M. washingtonensis and M. jungermannioides). The relationships within and among the clades are well resolved. Numerous instances of morphological homoplasy among the clades are inferred. Although nearly half of the morphological characters are highly homoplasious, the inclusion of a morphological data set in the combined parsimony and Bayesian analyses improves phylogenetic resolution and support. The phylogeny reveals three independent origins of a habitat adapted to cliff environments and three separate origins of the autogamous mating system. The phylogenetic results indicate the specific recognition of three rare taxa (M. ampliatus, M. patulus, and M. dudleyi), previously synonymized with more widespread species. A key to the species within the M. moschatus alliance is provided.
S1289	P. Wilkie;A. Clark;R. T. Pennington;M. Cheek;C. Bayer;C. C. Wilcock	2005	Phylogenetic Relationships within the Subfamily Sterculioideae (Malvaceae/Sterculiaceae-Sterculieae) using the Chloroplast gene ndhF	Systematic Botany							A parsimony analysis of ndhF nucleotide sequences representing 24 species and 13 genera of the Sterculioideae strongly supports the monophyly of the group. Within the Sterculioideae clade four major clades have good bootstrap support but relationships among them are not resolved. The analyses suggest the recognition of the genus Argyrodendron as separate from Heritiera and support Acropogon as separate from Sterculia, and Tarrietia as part of Heritiera. The current circumscriptions of Hildegardia and Firmiana is not supported. The use of fruit characters in the delimitation of genera within the Sterculioideae may not be appropriate for some genera and other morphological characters need to be found.
S1370	P. Wilkin;P. Schols;M. W. Chase;K. Chayamarit;C. A. Furness;F. Rakotonasolo;E. Smets;C. Thapyai	2005	A Plastid Gene Phylogeny of the Yam Genus, Dioscorea: Roots, Fruits and Madagascar	Systematic Botany	30	4					In the pantropical genus Dioscorea the identification of monophyletic subgeneric taxa is a priority following recent phylogenetic studies of the families and genera of Dioscoreales. A phylogenetic analysis based on sequence data from the plastid genes rbcL and matK is presented, using 59 species of Dioscorea and covering all the main Old World and selected New World lineages. The analysis used 25 outgroup taxa, including Trichopus Gaertn., Tacca J.R. & G. Forster, Stenomeris Planch., and Burmanniaceae Blume. The main findings are; a) that a clade of rhizomatous taxa are sister to the rest of Dioscorea; b) the main Old World groups (such as the right-twining D. sect. Enantiophyllum) are monophyletic and represent the crown clades of Dioscorea; and c) there are two distinct lineages among the Malagasy endemic taxa. The impact of the results on the infrageneric classification of Dioscorea is considered, in particular the possibility of greatly simplifying the classifications of Knuth and Burkill. It is also used to present novel hypotheses of character evolution in key underground organ, inflorescence, fruit and seed characters and the origins of diversity in Dioscorea.
S1328	M. J. Yoo;C. D. Bell;P. S. Soltis;D. E. Soltis	2005	Divergence Times and Historical Biogeography of Nymphaeles	Systematic Botany							Nymphaeales (Nymphaeaceae and Cabombaceae) comprise eight genera and approximately 70 species of aquatic plants, with a worldwide distribution in tropical to temperate regions. Previous analyses of molecular and morphological data have provided a well-resolved and strongly supported generic-level phylogeny for the order. Using published nuclear 18S rDNA and plastid rbcL and matK DNA sequences and a published topology for Nymphaeales, we estimated the divergence times of genera in this clade. We applied four different methods, a strict molecular clock, nonparametric rate smoothing (NPRS), penalized likelihood (PL), and a Bayesian method, to estimate divergence times. We calibrated the trees by using the minimum age of the angiosperm crown group constrained to 131.8 mya. Our results indicate that extant Nymphaeales diversified into two major clades corresponding to Cabombaceae and Nymphaeaceae during the Eocene (44.6±7.9 mya); extant genera of Nymphaeaceae date to 41.1±7.7 mya, and extant Cabombaceae diversified during the Miocene (19.9±5.6 mya). Whereas the stem lineage of Nymphaeales is old based on fossil evidence (125-115 mya), our results indicate that extant Nymphaeales diversified relatively recently. In another set of analyses we used PL to estimate the age of the angiosperms using two prominent Nymphaeales fossils as calibration points. These analyses suggest that these „Nymphaeales‰ fossils may be attached at deeper nodes than proposed in earlier studies. Using dispersal-vicariance analysis, we infer that the ancestor of Nymphaeales occupied the American and Eurasian continents during the Eocene and that the present distributional patterns require several subsequent dispersal and extinction events. This biogeographic inference is supported by the fossil record.
S1261	N. J. C. Zerega;D. Ragone;T. J. Motley	2005	Systematics and Species Limits of Breadfruit (Artocarpus, Moraceae)	Systematic Botany							Breadfruit (Artocarpus, Moraceae) is an important staple in Oceania and throughout much of the tropics. Interpretations of species delimitations among breadfruit and its closest relatives have varied from the recognition of one to several species. To better understand the systematics and ultimately the origins of this crop, we considered evidence from molecular data. Amplified fragment length polymorphism data for 261 individuals of breadfruit, its closest relatives, putative hybrids, and nine outgroup taxa were analyzed using neighbor joining and parsimony analyses. Three species, A. altilis (domesticated breadfruit), A. camansi, and A. mariannensis, are recognized and the existence of hybrids (A. altilis x A. mariannensis) verified. A revised treatment based on the molecular results, as well as morphological and biogeographical considerations, is presented.
S1359	L. B. Zhang;M. P. Simmons	2005	Phylogeny and delimitation of the Celastrales inferred from nuclear and plastid genes	Systematic Botany							A phylogenetic analysis of the Celastrales was performed using nuclear (18S, ITS 1, 26S rDNA) and plastid (atpB, matK, rbcL, trnL-F spacer) genes. In contrast to previous studies, Celastrales and Malpighiales are resolved as being more closely related to one another than either are to Oxalidales. The Huaceae are well supported as the sister group to Oxalidales, not Celastrales, as had been previously proposed. The Lepidobotryaceae are unambiguously supported as sister to the clade consisting of Celastraceae and Parnassiaceae. The Parnassiaceae are well supported as members of an early branching lineage within Celastraceae, rather than as its sister group. Likewise, Pottingeria appears to be part of an early derived lineage within Celastraceae. Empleuridium is unambiguously supported as a derived member of Celastraceae, as are Brexia, Canotia, Siphonodon, Stackhousia, and Tripterococcus. Bhesa is unambiguously supported as a member of the Malpighiales, though its relationships within the order remain unclear. Perrottetia should be transferred out of Celastraceae and into eurosids II, being closely related to Tapiscia and Dipentodon. These results help delimit the Celastrales and Celastraceae as morphologically more homogeneous taxa.
S1667	C. Aedo;M. A. García;M. Alarcon;J. J. Aldasoro;C. Navarro	2006	Taxonomic revision of Geranium subsect. Mediterranea (Geraniaceae)	Systematic Botany	32	1	93-128	10.1600/036364407780360111			Geranium subsect. Mediterranea (Geraniaceae) consists of ten species. The highest diversity of the group is located in the Caucasus and neighbouring areas of Turkey and Iran, with five endemic species. Other species reach western Europe and northwestern Africa. In contrast to the current literature, we consider G. montanum and G. ibericum subsp. jubatum to be synonyms of G. ibericum. An univariate morphometric study revealed some valuable quantitative characters useful for the identification of these species. Micromorphological features of pollen, stigmas, seeds, and mericarps are investigated by SEM. A new key is provided, as well as new and detailed descriptions. Geranium kurdicum is here illustrated for the first time. Eleven lectotypes are designated, and distribution maps are presented. Maximum parsimony and Bayesian analyses of chloroplastic trnL-trnF and ribosomal nuclear ITS regions show that sect. Mediterranea is monophyletic. Two clades are recovered, one including the annual species and other with the perennials, in which G. tuberosum (subsect. Tuberosa) emerges within a paraphyletic subsect. Mediterranea.
S1406	W. L. Applequist;W. L. Wagner;E. A. Zimmer;M. Nepokroeff	2006	Molecular evidence resolving the systematic position of Hectorella	Systematic Botany	31	2	310-319	10.1600/036364406777585900			The taxonomic position of Hectorella caespitosa and Lyallia kergelensis, caespitose plants endemic to New Zealand and to the Kerguélen Archipelago of Antarctica respectively, remains controversial. Some authors place them within Portulacaceae, but a slight majority of recent authorities treat them as a separate family, Hectorellaceae. Sequences of the chloroplast genes rbcL, ndhF and matK were obtained from H. caespitosa and added to previously published sequences from Portulacaceae and related families. These data strongly supported the derived position of Hectorella within a clade consisting of Western American members of Portulacaceae; the sister group of Hectorella was a clade including Montia, Claytonia and Lewisia. Implications for taxonomy are discussed; in order to accomodate monophyly in tribal-level classification while preserving current tribes Montieae and Lewiseae, the new tribe Hectorelleae is proposed for the family Portulacaceae.
S1596	C. D. Bailey;I. A. Al-Shehbaz;G. Rajanikanth	2006	Generic limits in tribe Halimolobeae and the descriptions of the new genus Exhalimolobos (Brassicaceae)	Systematic Botany							In 2002 a monophyletic group previously unrecognized within Brassicaceae was identified through phylogenetic analysis of morphological characters in combination with data from three DNA sequences (Bailey et al.; Syst. Bot. 27:318-332). As understood at that time, the halimolobine alliance (herein tribe Halimolobeae) comprised ca. 44 species from Halimolobos, Mancoa, Pennellia, and Sphaerocardamum. Within this group, a number of nomenclatural problems have remained unaddressed, including the polyphyly of both Halimolobos and Mancoa. With a developing understanding of Brassicaceae phylogeny, the Halimolobeae is robust in the context of higher level analyses and therefore in need of formal nomenclatural revision. The present study uses new and existing data in phylogenetic analyses based on trnL-F, ITS, and pistillata intron 1 data along with SEM studies of Synthlipsis elata and S. greggii to provide the bases for recircumscription of taxa assigned to the Halimolobeae. As recognized herein, the tribe includes five genera [Exhalimolobos, Halimolobos (including Synthlipsis elata), Mancoa, Pennellia, and Sphaerocardamum] and 39 species with two centers of distribution, one in north-central Mexico and the other in the Andes. A synopsis and keys to all taxa of the tribe are presented. A new species, E. friesii, is described, and 14 new combinations are proposed (E. arabioides, E. berlandieri, E. hispidulus, E. palmeri, E. parryi, E. pazense, E. polyspermus, E. weddellii, H. elatus, H. henricksonii, H. pubens, H. stylosus, P. lechleri, P. parvifolia).
S1367	J. B. Beck;I. A. Al-Shehbaz;B. A. Schaal	2006	Leavenworthia (Brassicaceae) revisited: Testing classic systematic and mating system hypotheses	Systematic Botany							The genus Leavenworthia (Brassicaceae) has long been a focus of research on mating system evolution, due to the presence of both self-incompatible and self-compatible species within the genus. A phylogenetic hypothesis invoking multiple transitions between mating systems has been proposed for Leavenworthia, but this hypothesis has not been subject to molecular phylogenetic analysis. DNA sequence variation from four non-coding chloroplast regions (the trnL intron; and the trnT-trnL, trnL-trnF, and psbA-trnH intergenic spacers) was used to reconstruct the generic phylogeny, to test the validity of several proposed species, and to assess the number of mating system transitions within the genus. The strict consensus tree largely reflected the long-standing phylogenetic hypothesis for Leavenworthia, although additional data are needed to fully validate the recognition of L. crassa and L. alabamica. Unexpected results included the placement of L. uniflora as sister to the rest of the genus, and the apparent hybridization between L. exigua and L. torulosa. Finally, our data strongly supported a minimum of three mating system transitions within Leavenworthia.
S1652	S. J. Brunsfeld;T. R. Miller;B. C. Carstens	2006	Insights into the Biogeography of the Pacific Northwest of North America: Evidence from the Phylogeography of Salix melanopsis (Salicaceae)	Systematic Botany							The disjunction of the mesic coniferous forests of the Pacific Northwest (PNW) has long been of interest to biogeographers, and several hypotheses have been posed to explain the disjunct distribution pattern. Analysis of intraspecific chloroplast DNA variation (1785 bp of matK and 400 bp of rpl16) in Salix melanopsis allows these hypotheses to be tested. Our study confirmed the existence of three genetic races (uncorrected sequence divergence ranged from 0.7-1.1%) within the species, which differ in distribution and ecology. The mesic race, associated with mesic coniferous forests, was the focus of this study. This race consists of two major lineages (uncorrected sequence divergence ranged up to 0.28%), one of which is associated with an apparent glacial refugium south of glaciation in the northern Rocky Mountains. The three haplotypes that comprise the first lineage are largely segregated into separate river canyons that comprise the „Greater Clearwater Refugium‰. The other major lineage consists of three haplotypes that occur throughout the PNW, except in the core of the Clearwater refugium. Vicariance is implicated in the origin of this latter lineage. Dispersal both before and during the Holocene appears to have occurred: the colonization of the Cascade Range from the Rocky Mountains, and later the dispersal of the Cascade haplotype into the area formerly buried by Cordilleran ice. More limited dispersal of Rocky Mountain haplotypes has resulted in contact zones with elevated haplotype diversity. The results of this study allow us to refine previous phylogeographic hypotheses of the PNW.
S1465	J. M. Budke;B. Goffinet	2006	Phylogenetic Analyses of the Timmiaceae (Bryophyta: Musci) Inferred from Nuclear and Chloroplast Sequence Data	Systematic Botany							Nuclear ribosomal (26S) and chloroplast (trnL-trnF and atpB-rbcL spacer) genomic regions were sequenced from 29 exemplars of Timmiaceae and five outgroup taxa. Phylogenetic hypotheses were tested from analyses of the individual regions and a combined dataset, using both parsimony and Bayesian inference methods. Estimates of branch support were established using bootstrap analyses and Bayesian posterior probabilities. The analyses were used to test the monophyly of the species and the relationships among taxa in Timmiaceae. Previous hypotheses regarding the relationships within the family were based solely on morphology. Our molecular phylogenetic analyses both corroborate and reject elements of the traditional Timmiaceae taxonomy. Timmia austriaca, T. megapolitana s.s., T. megapolitana subsp. bavarica and section Norvegica represent monophyletic taxa. Timmia norvegica s.s., T. norvegica var. excurrens, and T. sibirica were polyphyletic, but together form a single clade. We, therefore, recommend recognizing them as a single taxon, T. norvegica.
S1571	K. F. Chung;B. A. Schaal	2006	Inclusion of the South Pacific alpine plant Oreomyrrhis (Apiaceae) within Chaerophyllum Based on Nuclear and Chloroplast DNA Sequences	Systematic Botany							Sequences of chloroplast intergenic spacers atpB-rbcL and trnS-trnG were analyzed to test the hypotheses resulted from previous ITS data that the South Pacific alpine genus Oreomyrrhis is sister to the North American species of the otherwise Eurasian genus Chaerophyllum. Phylogenetic analyses using maximum parsimony, maximum likelihood and Bayesian inference of separate and combined matrices of the chloroplast and ITS data sets strongly support the monophyly of Oreomyrrhis and its sister relationships with the North American Chaerophyllum. Relationships among other major clades with Chaerophyllum are congruence with previous studies. Based on the well supported phylogenetic relationship, we propose to transfer all currently recognized taxa of Oreomyrrhis into Chaerophyllum. We also propose to use North American clade and oreomyrrhis clade as unranked names to designate the two well supported clades within sect. Chaerophyllum, an alternative that can avoid nomenclatural cascades resulted from rank changes. The proposed nomenclatural changes include 3 new names, Chaerophyllum australianum, Chaerophyllum guatemalense, and Chaerophyllum novae-zelandiae, and 26 new combinations, Chaerophyllum andicola, Chaerophyllum argentum, Chaerophyllum azorellaceum, Chaerophyllum basicola, Chaerophyllum borneense, Chaerophyllum brevipes, Chaerophyllum buwaldianum, Chaerophyllum colensoi, Chaerophyllum colensoi var. delicatulum, Chaerophyllum colensoi var. hispidum, Chaerophyllum colensoi var. multifidum, Chaerophyllum daucoides, Chaerophyllum eriopodum, Chaerophyllum gunnii, Chaerophyllum involucratum, Chaerophyllum lineare, Chaerophyllum nanhuense, Chaerophyllum orizabae, Chaerophyllum papuanum, Chaerophyllum plicatum, Chaerophyllum pulvinificum, Chaerophyllum pumilum, Chaerophyllum ramosum, Chaerophyllum sessiliflorum, Chaerophyllum taiwanianum, and Chaerophyllum tolucanum.
S1491	A. De-Nova;V. Sosa;K. J. Wurdack	2006	Phylogenetic Relationships and the Description of a New Species of Enriquebeltrania (Euphorbiaceae s.s.): An Enigmatic Genus Endemic to Mexico	Systematic Botany	31	3					Enriquebeltrania, a genus of trees and shrubs endemic to Mexico, traditionally has been included in Euphorbiaceae (tribe Adelieae, subfamily Acalyphoideae). It was previously thought to be monotypic with a disjunct distribution on the Yucatan Peninsula and along the Pacific coast in Jalisco and Sinaloa. There is some question about whether Adelia and Enriquebeltrania should be treated as distinct. Morphological and molecular characters (trnL-F spacer and rbcL DNA sequences) were utilized in phylogenetic analyses to determine if Enriquebeltrania belongs to the tribe Adelieae, to test whether should be recognized as a genus separate from Adelia, and to determine the number of species that should be recognized. Results indicate that Enriquebeltrania does not belong to tribe Adelieae, that it should be recognized as a genus separate from Adelia, and that it consists of two species. The second species, Enriquebeltrania disjuncta, is named and described here.
S1553	A. Delgado-Salinas;R. Bibler;M. Lavin	2006	Phylogeny of the Genus Phaseolus (Leguminosae): A Recent Diversification in an Ancient Landscape	Systematic Botany							A combined parsimony analysis of the species of Phaseolus and closely related New World genera was performed with sequences from the nuclear ribosomal ITS/5.8S and plastid trnK loci. Species relationships are resolved with high parsimony bootstrap support at all hierarchical levels. All species of Phaseolus except five enigmatic ones belong to one of eight clades. These eight show some morphological, ecological, or biogeographical distinction, and are informally recognized in a phylogenetic classification. The five enigmatic species, Phaseolus glabellus, P. macrolepis, P. microcarpus, P. oaxacanus, and P. talamancensis are weakly resolved as sister to the Tuerckheimii group. An evolutionary rates analysis that biases for old age estimates suggests that the Phaseolus stem clade is the same age as the New World Phaseolinae crown clade with a maximum age of ca. 8 Ma. The Phaseolus crown is estimated to be no older than ca. 6 Ma, and the average age of the eight well supported crown clades within Phaseolus is ca. 2 Ma. The maximum age estimate of a Late Pliocene to Pleistocene diversification of Phaseolus post-dates the major tectonic activity in Mexico where Phaseolus diversity is centered.
S1573	K. M. Fisher;D. P. Wall;K. L. Yip;B. D. Mishler	2006	Phylogeny of Calymperaceae, With a Rank-Free Systematic Treatment	Systematic Botany							The Calymperaceae are a large pantropical moss clade. This paper reports the results of a phylogenetic analysis of the Calymperaceae, with an emphasis on the relationships of the large and putatively polyphyletic Syrrhopodon. Two chloroplast genes, rps4 and trnL, part of the nuclear encoded gpd, and morphological characters were analyzed individually and in combination. The total-evidence phylogenetic tree was used to construct a rank-free classification of the Calymperaceae, following the guidelines of the current draft of the PhyloCode. The total-evidence cladistic analysis supports the monophyly of Calymperes and Mitthyridium, as well as the „leucobryoid‰ Calymperaceae, and confirms that Syrrhopodon (s.l.) is polyphyletic. In the context of this phylogeny, the presence of peristome teeth and bordered leaves are derived features within the Calymperaceae. The rank-free system of classification has several advantages over the Linnaean system for coping with the taxonomic changes implicit in this phylogeny, primarily with regard to preserving the names of well-supported monophyletic groups such as Mitthyridium. However, we question the utility of article 11.7 of the PhyloCode, and offer some practical observations regarding clade names and the use of type specimens as specifiers.
S1450	O. Fiz;P. Vargas;M. L. Alarcón;J. J. Aldasoro	2006	Phylogenetic relationships and evolution in Erodium (Geraniaceae) based on trnL-trnF sequences	Systematic Botany							Phylogenetic reconstructions in the Mediterranean genus Erodium are first time performed using both 96 trnL-trnF sequences from Erodium (90) plus three outgroups (California, Geranium, Monsonia) and analyses of Maximum Parsimony (MP), Neighbor Joining (NJ) and Bayesian Inference (BI). Association between reproductive proprieties (high selfing rates, flower asymmetry, insect-attraction structures), life form and breeding system distributed in different lineages suggests multiple shifts from allogamy to autogamy in the course of evolution, whereas dioecy has occurred once. These phylogenetic analyses revealed a remarkable capability for dispersal in Erodium because closely-related species from the same lineage occur in different continents. Major lineages containing sublineages of species also from several continents lead us to interpret ancient dispersal activity. Establishment of Mediterranean climates in most continents may have been crucial in the evolution of Erodium, as manifested by occurrence of annual forms in the four major lineages. The body of knowledge accumulated from molecular phylogenetics and morphology lead us to conclude that the Mediterranean region harbors the major center of diversity of Erodium, where active differentiation in dry, disturbed environment is still operating.
S1473	F. Forest;J. C. Manning	2006	Evidence for Inclusion of South African Endemic Nylandtia in Muraltia (Polygalaceae)	Systematic Botany							Nylandtia (Polygalaceae) is a small South African genus of two or more species distributed mainly in the Cape region. Previous studies based on anatomical, morphological and molecular data have already revealed a close relationship between Nylandtia and Muraltia, a genus of 117 species that is nearly endemic to South Africa. New evidence from molecular studies of family Polygalaceae and genus Muraltia shows that Nylandtia is derived from genus Muraltia, and is nested in Muraltia subgenus Psiloclada. These results have prompted a morphological re-evaluation of the genera Nylandtia and Muraltia, supporting the conclusion that the two species of Nylandtia currently recognized, N. spinosa and N. scoparia, should be included in subgenus Psiloclada within the genus Muraltia. Only one nomenclatural change is necessary: Muraltia spinosa (L.) F. Forest & J.C. Manning, comb. nov.
S1427	P. K. Fritsch;B. C. Cruz;F. Almeda;Y. Wang;S. Shi	2006	Phylogeny of Symplocos Based on DNA Sequences of the Chloroplast trnC-trnD Intergenic Region	Systematic Botany							Phylogenetic analysis of 74 species of Symplocos was conducted with DNA sequence data from the chloroplast trnC-trnD intergenic region. Maximum parsimony and Bayesian inference trees are consistent with those of a previous study based on combined data from the nuclear ribosomal ITS region and the chloroplast regions rpl16, matK, and trnL-trnF. The inclusion of 21 phylogenetically informative indel characters from trnC-trnD resulted in greater maximum parsimony resolution and clade support than with these characters excluded. A combined five-gene region (trnC-trnD, ITS, rpl16, matK, and trnL-trnF) analysis based on a data set with complete sequence data is almost completely concordant with that of the combined four-gene data set, and displays higher resolution and overall clade support (in some cases 20 to > 30 bootstrap percentage points). The data indicate monophyly for only one subgenus (Epigenia) and four sections (Barberina, Cordyloblaste, Neosymplocos, and Urbaniocharis) of Symplocos; the other three subgenera (Symplocos, Hopea, and Microsymplocos) and tested sections (Bobua, Palaeosymplocos, and Symplocastrum) will require recircumscription to accord with the principle of monophyly. Supermatrix and supertree analyses were conducted to provide phylogenetic estimates based on all 107 available Symplocos samples with sequence data from at least two of the five gene regions. The supermatrix consensus tree is completely consistent with that from the combined five-gene estimate based on complete sequence data, whereas the supertree consensus differs from these trees in two regions of the topology. The supermatrix consensus also displays greater clade resolution than the supertree consensus. The aligned trnC-trnD data set exhibits a lower percentage of parsimony-informative characters than those based on matK and rpl16 sequences. The length, organization, and relative sequencing ease of trnC-trnD in Symplocos nonetheless confirm the utility of this region for phylogenetic estimation in flowering plants, as previously described.
S1607	J. F. Gaskin;L. M. Wilson	2006	Phylogenetic relationships among native and naturalized Hieracium (Asteraceae) in Canada and the United States based on plastid DNA sequences	Systematic Botany							We used parsimony and maximum likelihood analyses of chloroplast DNA to examine the relationships of native North American Hieracium (hawkweeds; Asteraceae) with non-native Hieracium species being studied for classical biological control. Thirty-six taxa were included; these representing the three morphologically-based subgenera: Pilosella from Eurasia, the circumboreal Hieracium, and Chionoracium from North and South America. Results from the trnT-F and petN-psbM sequence data strongly support the morphologically based classifications. Exceptions include the placement of H. canadense within subgenus Chionoracium rather than subgenus Hieracium, which may be due to chloroplast capture. Placement of the genus Andryala within Hieracium subgenus Pilosella is also supported. Additionally, species in subgenus Pilosella targeted for classical biological control are still supported as being in a separate subgenus from native North American taxa.
S1536	S. A. Graham;J. V. Freudenstein;M. Luker	2006	A phylogenetic study of Cuphea (Lythraceae) based on morphology and nuclear rDNA	Systematic Botany	31						Cuphea is an endemic genus of the New World and the most speciose member of the Lythraceae with ca. 260 species classified in two subgenera and 13 sections. As a first attempt to construct a phylogenetic framework for the genus, data from morphology and nuclear ITS sequences for 53 species and four outgroup taxa were analyzed. Independent results employing morphological and molecular datasets confirmed Cuphea as monophyletic with Pleurophora as sister. The morphological strict consensus was substantially unresolved. The ITS parsimony and maximum likelihood phylogenies indicated South America as the initial center of diversification and identified a deep trichotomy, one branch of which was equivalent to subg. Cuphea. The ITS analyses also recognized seven well-supported clades, each composed of members from two to four taxonomic sections. Species of sect. Melvilla, appear in five of the seven clades, supporting the hypothesis that the large, intensely-colored, bird-pollinated floral tubes that define the section are convergent, having evolved from smaller, more promiscuously-pollinated, green-tubed flowers. Sixteen endemic North American species have a single South American origin and form the core of a secondary center of Cuphea diversification in Mexico. The ITS analyses provide initial phylogenetic hypotheses for the genus that clarify relationships previously obscured by the highly homoplastic nature of the morphological taxonomic characters.
S1549	D. J. Hearn	2006	Adenia (Passifloraceae) and its adaptive radiation: Phylogeny and growth form diversification	Systematic Botany							The genus Adenia provides a natural experiment to investigate the evolution of growth form. Within the group, trees, shrubs, herbs, vines, and lianas are present. Using ITS1 + 5.8S + ITS2 sequence data, a phylogeny of 67 of ~100 species of Adenia is inferred using parsimony and Bayesian analyses. Specific hypotheses of monophyly are also tested to couch the analyses of growth form evolution within a phylogenetic framework. Within the context of this phylogeny, synapomorphies for major clades are discussed, as are patterns of growth form evolution. Absolute divergence times of nodes are estimated using penalized likelihood, and speciation rate based on these times is inferred to be fast relative to some other lineages of life. By reconstructing evolutionary history on a sample of trees from the posterior distribution of the Bayesian analysis, it is estimated that succulent stems evolved ca. three times, and tubers ca. seven. Transitions between markedly different growth forms occur on the scale of a few hundred thousand to a few million years, and close relatives frequently have different forms with no intermediates. The rapid diversification rates, fast morphological transitions, and multiple origins of water storage tissue in roots and shoots are hypothesized to result from a shared developmental program for water storage tissue is flexibly turned on and off in stems and roots.
S1346	S. Hennequin;A. Ebihara;M. Ito;K. Iwatsuki;J. Y. Dubuisson	2006	New Insights into the Phylogeny of the Genus Hymenophyllum s.l. (Hymenophyllaceae): Revealing the Polyphyly of Mecodium	Systematic Botany							With more than 100 species, Mecodium is the largest infrageneric taxon of Hymenophyllum s.l. It was long considered a natural and homogeneous group, but recent phylogenetic studies have questioned this assertion. Using rbcL, rbcL-accD, and rps4-trnS sequences, we demonstrate that Mecodium is highly polyphyletic. Several species of Mecodium form the derived clade "H. polyanthos"; one species is nested within a second derived clade; and the remaining species are assigned to five basal clades including taxa regarded as distantly related. These clades are strongly supported both by parsimony and Bayesian analyses, however the relative placement of the basalmost clades lacks support. We show that the members of "basal Mecodium" are characterized by features that are plesiomorphic for Hymenophyllum s.l. - a reduced or dorsi-ventral stele, a lamina at least partially thickened, and a basic chromosome number x = 36-, whereas taxa in the "H. polyanthos" clade have a subcollateral stele, the one-cell thick lamina typical of the family, and x = 28. There is a high level of variation among the basal species, and, notably, the rhizome indumentum is shown to be an interesting character for distinguishing among the basal clades. These new findings stress the need for further studies on Hymenophyllum s.l., and reassessment of its classification.
S1495	S. B. Hoot;W. C. Taylor;N. Napier	2006	Phylogeny and biogeography of Isoetes (Isoetaceae) based on nuclear and chloroplast DNA sequence data	Systematic Botany							Despite its ancient origins, worldwide distribution, and adaptation to diverse habitats, Isoëtes species have a highly conserved morphology, making it difficult to resolve phylogenetic relationships using morphological characters. In this paper, we report the results from various analyses (maximum parsimony, maximum likelihood, and Bayesian inference) for Isoëtes species from around the world based on nucleotide sequences from the nuclear internal transcribed spacer (ITS) and chloroplast atpB/rbcL intergenic spacer regions. The trees resulting from our analyses of the combined data contain six major well supported clades (bootstrap > 90%, posterior probabilities = 1.00): A clade with possible Gondwanan affinities (I. australis, I. coromandelina, I. panamensis, I. cubana, I. jamaicensis); a South African clade (I. capensis, I. toximontana, I. stellenbossiensis, I. stephansenii); a largely Northern Hemisphere clade (I. nuttallii, I. orcuttii, I. minima, I. dixitei, I. abyssinica, I. olympica, I. longissima, I. velata); an Asian/Australasian clade (I. drummondii, I. gunnii, I. pusilla, I. kirkii, I. muelleri, I. taiwanensis, I. japonica, I. yunguiensis, I. habbemensis), a Mediterannean clade (I. histrix and I. setacea), and a poorly resolved clade consisting of 12 new world species (American species complex). Our results are compared to past classifications and various biogeographical scenarios are explored.
S1592	M. L. Huertas;J. V. Schneider;G. Zizka	2006	Phylogenetic analysis of Palaua (Malveae, Malvaceae) based on plastid and nuclear sequences	Systematic Botany							Palaua is a genus of 15 species endemic to the fog-influenced lomas formations amidst the coastal deserts of Peru and Chile, characterized by the unique irregularly arranged, superimposed carpels. The only exception is P. sandemanii, which has the carpels arranged in a single whorl, the state observed in the potential sister groups. To investigate the monophyly of Palaua and to compare previous infrageneric classifications in a phylogenetic framework, Maximum parsimony and Bayesian analyses were performed using plastid (psbA-trnH intergenic spacer) and nuclear (internal transcribed spacer 1 and 2) DNA sequences. There is evidence for three clades within a monophyletic Palaua: one comprising the two small-flowered species P. inconspicua and P. modesta as sister to the rest of the genus, a second that unites all species with dissected leaves, and a third that comprises the rest of the genus (species with entire to shallowly lobed leaves; except P. guentheri). In contrast to our expectations, P. sandemanii could not be confirmed as sister to the rest of the genus, but rather is nested within a monophyletic Palaua. Parsimony-based reconstruction of the evolution of carpel arrangement showed that there was a change in Palaua from superimposed, irregularly arranged carpels to uniseriate carpels in P. sandemanii; however, Templeton and Shimodaira-Hasegawa tests did not reject the alternative hypothesis that the uniseriate carpels are ancestral. Besides carpel arrangement, leaf division (and not growth form) seems to be an appropriate character for an infrageneric classification.
S1537	M. B. Islam;M. P. Simmons	2006	A Thorny Dilemma: Testing Alternative Intrageneric Classifications within Ziziphus (Rhamnaceae)	Systematic Botany							Ziziphus comprises approximately 170 species native to the tropics and subtropics. Two economically important species, Z. jujuba and Z. mauritiana, are cultivated for their fruit. Given the economic importance of these two species, we undertook a reexamination of the intrageneric phylogenetic relationships to identify their closest relatives and to test two alternative intrageneric classifications. These two classifications were tested by using a simultaneous analysis of morphological characters together with nuclear (ITS and 26S rDNA) and plastid (trnL-F spacer) genes. The Old World and New World species of Ziziphus formed two separate well supported clades. The Old World species of Ziziphus are more closely related to Paliurus than to the New World species, thereby rendering Ziziphus paraphyletic. Sarcomphalus is placed within the New World Ziziphus clade, which supports the transfer of Sarcomphalus to Ziziphus. The earlier placement of Condaliopsis in Ziziphus was supported for one species previously placed in Condaliopsis, Z. obtusifolia, but was contradicted for the other Condaliopsis-like species, Z. celata. Ziziphus celata is more closely related to Rhamneae than it is to Paliureae.
S1496	M. B. Islam;M. P. Simmons;R. H. Archer	2006	Phylogeny of the Elaeodendron Group (Celastraceae) Inferred from Morphological Characters and Nuclear and Plastid Genes	Systematic Botany							The phylogeny of the Elaeodendron group was inferred in a simultaneous analysis of morphological characters together with nuclear (ITS and 26S rDNA) and plastid (matK, trnL-F spacer) genes. The circumscription of genera in this group has long been controversial, particularly with respect to Cassine and Elaeodendron. Cassine, narrowly defined so as to include three species native to southern Africa, was unambiguously supported as distinct from Elaeodendron. The widely distributed genus Elaeodendron was supported as a natural group, sister to Pleurostylia. Brexia, which has been variously assigned to the Escalloniaceae, Brexiaceae, and Grossulariaceae, was unambiguously supported as the sister group to the clade of Elaeodendron and Pleurostylia. Preliminary species sampling supported Empleuridium, which had been classified within the Rutaceae, as related to Mystroxylon, Pseudosalacia, and Robsonodendron. Allocassine and Lauridia were resolved as closely related to one another, supporting their previously inferred relationship. Maurocenia and Cassine were supported as closely related to one another, with evidence for Maurocenia being nested within Cassine. Lydenburgia abbottii was resolved as closely related to Lydenburgia cassinoides, supporting its transfer from Catha. Three new combinations are made: Elaeodendron bupleuroides (Guillaumin) R.H. Archer, Elaeodendron parvifolium R.H. Archer, and Elaeodendron pininsulare Hürl. subsp. Poyaense (I.H. Müller) R.H. Archer.
S1666	Z. Jiao;J. Li	2006	Phylogeny and biogeography of intercontinental disjunct Gelsemiaceae inferred from chloroplast and nuclear DNA sequences	Systematic Botany							Gelsemiaceae consist of two intercontinental disjunct genera: Gelsemium (3 species) and Mostuea (9 species). Gelsemium is distributed in eastern Asia and North America, while Mostuea is disjunct between South America and Africa. In this study, sequences of three chloroplast genes (ndhF, rbcL, and matK) and the external transcribed spacer of the ribosomal DNA region were used to examine phylogenetic relationships and biogeography of Gelsemiaceae. Our results support the monophyly of Gelsemiaceae, Mostuea, and Gelsemium; however, more data are needed to resolve relationships of Gelsemiaceae with other families of Gentianales. Within Mostuea, M. surinamensis of South America is sister to the clade containing African species, indicating that it is unlikely that M. surinamensis is an introduced species from Africa. The relationship agrees with seed pubescence. North American species of Gelsemium form a clade that is sister to G. elegans of eastern Asia, which is consistent with flower and fruit morphology. The estimated times of divergence are at least 21.2±0.7 mya between Gelsemium and Mostuea, 8.4±0.8 mya between eastern Asian and North American species of Gelsemium, 2.9±0.4 mya between G. sempervirens and G. rankinii, and 7.29±0.4 between South American and African species of Mostuea. Similar divergence times between the two intercontinental disjunctions support the proposition that Laurasian migration has played an important role in the formation of Gondwanan disjunctions. Given the broadleaved growth habit and ecology of Gelsemiaceae, the North Atlantic land bridge may be the main route for population exchanges between the continents.
S1380	L. A. Johnson;R. L. Johnson	2006	Morphological delimitation and molecular evidence for allopolyploidy in Collomia wilkenii (Polemoniaceae), a new species from northern Nevada	Systematic Botany							Under the criterion of limited homogenizing gene flow as evidenced through specimen aggregation analysis, and genetic evidence of a barrier to gene exchange with its closest relatives, we describe a new species in Polemoniaceae, Collomia wilkenii. Collomia wilkenii superficially resembles Collomia tinctoria and Collomia linearis in some features, but, upon examination, has consistent, unique character combinations that distinguish it from both species, as well as Collomia renacta and Collomia tenella. These features include particulars of calyx morphology, corolla morphology, stamen insertion and exertion, numbers of flowers in inflorescence clusters, and the kinds and distribution of glandular and eglandular trichomes. Comparative DNA sequencing of chloroplast genes indicates Collomia wilkenii has the chloroplast genome of Collomia tenella. Nuclear ITS sequences show additivity in Collomia wilkenii between Collomia linearis and Collomia tenella, a pattern confirmed by cloning this region. Two low copy nuclear loci, idh-A and idh-B, indicate an allopolyploid origin of this previously undescribed species. Collomia wilkenii is endemic to northern Nevada, occuring in several remote locations across the breadth of the state.
S1564	M. H. Jørgensen;R. Elven;A. Tribsch;T. M. Gabrielsen;B. Stedje;C. Brochmann	2006	Taxonomy and evolutionary relationships in the Saxifraga rivularis complex	Systematic Botany							In many arctic-alpine plant groups, reticulate evolutionary histories have resulted in problems with species delimitation and phylogenetic reconstruction. In the Saxifraga rivularis complex (2n = 26, 52), the number of species accepted ranges from a single polymorphic one (S. rivularis s.l.) to several (the circumpolar S. hyperborea, the amphi-Atlantic S. rivularis, the three amphi-Pacific species S. bracteata, S. flexuosa and S. arctolitoralis, and S. debilis in the Rocky Mountains). A combination of molecular (AFLPs), flow cytometrical, and morphological data from samples covering most of the distribution range was used to delimit taxonomic species and to unravel their evolutionary relationships. Four lineages with distinct morphological differences were recognized, representing four species: the diploids S. bracteata, S. hyperborea (including S. flexuosa), and S. debilis, and the tetraploid S. rivularis (including S. arctolitoralis). Based on a synthesis of the available data we provide a taxonomic revision of the complex and propose one rank change (S. rivularis subsp. arctolitoralis comb. nov.). Genome sizes as well as the intermediate position of the S. rivularis lineage in the molecular and morphological analyses suggest a single allopolyploid origin from the S. bracteata and the S. hyperborea lineages, most likely in Beringia.
S1527	M. V. Kapralov;H. Akhani;E. V. Voznesenskaya;G. Edwards;V. Franceschi;E. H. Roalson	2006	Phylogenetic relationships in the Salicornioideae / Suaedoideae / Salsoloideae s.l. (Chenopodiaceae) clade and a clarification of the phylogenetic position of Bienertia and Alexandra using multiple DNA sequence datasets	Systematic Botany							The Chenopodiaceae includes C3, C4 with diverse kinds of Kranz anatomy and single-celled C4 species without Kranz anatomy; thus, it is of key importance for understanding evolution of C4 photosynthesis. All of the C4 genera except Atriplex, which belongs to Chenopodioideae, are in the Salicornioideae / Suaedoideae / Salsoloideae s.l. (including Camphorosmeae and Sclerolaeneae) clade. Our study focuses on the relationships of the main lineages within this clade with an emphasis on the placement of the single cell functioning C4 genus Bienertia using maximum parsimony, maximum likelihood, and Bayesian inference phylogenetic analyses of the nuclear ribosomal ITS and five chloroplast DNA regions (atpB-rbcL, matK, psbB-psbH, rbcL, and trnL-trnF). Further we provide a detailed phylogeny of Alexandra and Suaeda based on ITS, atpB-rbcL and psbB-psbH. Our molecular data provide strong statistical support for the monophyly of: (1) a Salicornioideae / Suaedoideae / Salsoloideae s.l. clade; (2) a Salicornioideae / Suaedoideae clade; (3) the subfamilies Salicornioideae, Suaedoideae (including Bienertia) and Salsoloideae s.l.; (4) the tribes Suaedeae, Salsoleae, and Camphorosmeae; (5) the Salicornieae if Halopeplideae is included; and (6) Suaeda if Alexandra is included. There are four independent origins of C4 photosynthesis within the Suaedoideae including two parallel origins of Kranz C4 anatomy (in Suaeda sections Salsina s.l. and Schoberia) and two independent origins of C4 systems without Kranz anatomy (in Bienertia and the Suaeda section Borszczowia).
S1448	D. P. Little	2006	Evolution and Circumscription of the True Cypresses (Cupressaceae: Cupressus)	Systematic Botany	31						Recent phylogenetic investigations of Cupressoideae have found evidence to suggest that Cupressus is not monophyletic. This study tested the division of Cupressus into an Old World clade and a New World clade with complete sampling of the 28 extant species. Data from anatomy, biochemistry, micromorphology, reproductive development, reproductive morphology, and vegetative morphology were combined with molecular sequence data (matK, NEEDLY intron 2, nrITS, rbcL, and trnL) to produce the most complete hypothesis of evolutionary relationships within Cupressoideae to date. Callitropsis, Cupressus, and Juniperus formed a well--supported monophyletic group (100%). Within this clade, the only demonstrably monophyletic genus was Juniperus (100%). Monophyly of the 12 Old World species of Cupressus was well supported (100%). Old World species of Cupressus were sister to Juniperus (99%). Callitropsis and the 16 New World species of Cupressus were resolved as the sister group to the Old World Cupressus plus Juniperus (100%) clade---rendering Cupressus polyphyletic. The relationship between Callitropsis and the New World species of Cupressus was not resolved. Based on the results of the combined analysis generic circumscriptions were modified: Cupressus was restricted exclusively to Old World species and Callitropsis was expanded to include the New World species previously classified as Cupressus.
S1659	U. Manns;A. A. Anderberg	2006	Character Evolution in Anagallis (Myrsinaceae), Inferred from Morphological and Molecular Data	Systematic Botany							Morphological and molecular data were analyzed using parsimony to trace character evolution within Anagallis s.l., including Anagallis, Asterolinon, Pelletiera, Lysimachia nemorum, and L. serpyllifolia, which are distributed among two sister clades. The first clade, comprising Anagallis arvensis, A. foemina, A. monelli, Asterolinon, Pelletiera, Lysimachia nemorum, and L. serpyllifolia is supported by synapomorphies such as an annual, repeatedly branching habit, sessile leaves, flowers in almost all leaf axils, and membranous slightly dentate calyx margins, of which all but the last are homoplasious within Anagallis s.l.. The second clade, comprising Anagallis species only, is supported by a large number of synapomorphies, of which the majority are floral features. Placement of ten taxa, for which no DNA was available, is proposed based on morphological characters evaluated in the light of the result of the phylogenetic analysis of sequenced taxa.
S1584	K. Marlowe;L. Hufford	2006	Taxonomy and biogeography of Gaillardia (Asteraceae): a phylogenetic analysis	Systematic Botany							Phylogeny reconstructions based on DNA sequences from nuclear ribosomal internal and external transcribed spacers and plastid trnT-trnF regions were used to examine the taxonomy and biogeography of North American Gaillardia (Asteraceae). Phylogenetic analyses based on maximum parsimony, maximum likelihood and Bayesian inference criteria recovered consistently, several well supported clades. Gaillardia comosa, G. gypsophila, and G. suavis, forming sect. Agassizia, were placed sister to the rest of Gaillardia, in which the two major clades correspond to sects. Gaillardia and Hollandia. Section Hollandia consists of the Gulf Coast G. aestivalis complex. Three major, well supported clades were consistently recovered in Section Gaillardia: (1) G. multiceps and G. turneri were sister to an Intermountain clade of G. parry, G. spathulata, and G. flava; (2) a paraphyletic G. pinnatifida and G. arizonica; and (3) G. pulchella, G. aristata, G. amblyodon, G. coahuilensis, G. mexicana, G. henricksonii, and G. powellii. DIVA reconstructed a Chihuahuan Desert origin for Gaillardia, an inference consistent with earlier hypotheses. Major range expansions in Gaillardia included the following: (1) eastward expansion into central Texas and along the Gulf Coast in sect. Hollandia; (2) northwestern expansion, resulting ultimately in the Intermountain clade, but including also G. multiceps and G. turneri; (3) northward expansion of the G. pinnatifida complex; (4) easterly and especially northward expansion of G. amblyodon, G. pulchella, and G. aristata; and, possibly, (5) northward expansion onto the Great Plains by G. suavis.
S1585	K. Marlowe;L. Hufford	2006	Taxonomy and biogeography of Gaillardia (Asteraceae): a phylogenetic analysis	Systematic Botany							Phylogeny reconstructions based on DNA sequences from nuclear ribosomal internal and external transcribed spacers and plastid trnT-trnF regions were used to examine the taxonomy and biogeography of North American Gaillardia (Asteraceae). Phylogenetic analyses based on maximum parsimony, maximum likelihood and Bayesian inference criteria recovered consistently, several well supported clades. Gaillardia comosa, G. gypsophila, and G. suavis, forming sect. Agassizia, were placed sister to the rest of Gaillardia, in which the two major clades correspond to sects. Gaillardia and Hollandia. Section Hollandia consists of the Gulf Coast G. aestivalis complex. Three major, well supported clades were consistently recovered in Section Gaillardia: (1) G. multiceps and G. turneri were sister to an Intermountain clade of G. parry, G. spathulata, and G. flava; (2) a paraphyletic G. pinnatifida and G. arizonica; and (3) G. pulchella, G. aristata, G. amblyodon, G. coahuilensis, G. mexicana, G. henricksonii, and G. powellii. DIVA reconstructed a Chihuahuan Desert origin for Gaillardia, an inference consistent with earlier hypotheses. Major range expansions in Gaillardia included the following: (1) eastward expansion into central Texas and along the Gulf Coast in sect. Hollandia; (2) northwestern expansion, resulting ultimately in the Intermountain clade, but including also G. multiceps and G. turneri; (3) northward expansion of the G. pinnatifida complex; (4) easterly and especially northward expansion of G. amblyodon, G. pulchella, and G. aristata; and, possibly, (5) northward expansion onto the Great Plains by G. suavis.
S1441	C. T. Martine;D. Vanderpool;G. J. Anderson;D. H. Les	2006	Phylogenetic Relationships of Andromonoecious and Dioecious Australian Species of Solanum subgenus Leptostemonum section Melongena: Inferences from ITS Sequence Data	Systematic Botany							This is the first extensive molecular phylogeny for any group of Solanum in Australia. A total of 64 specimens representing 29 taxa was sampled, including 18 endemic Australian members of subgenus Leptostemonum (the „spiny solanums‰) section Melongena sensu Symon. Data from the rDNA ITS region were analyzed using parsimony, maximum likelihood, and Bayesian methods to test the hypothesis that the dioecious and andromonoecious Australian species of section Melongena constitute a monophyletic group. Analyses showed strong support for the recognition of five clades among the Australian species of the section, but little support for the monophyly of the section itself. Australian dioecious Solanum species form two distinct clades and a number of enigmatic and previously unplaced dioecious taxa are here placed within a single clade. Three groups of andromonoecious species are also each monophyletic and are nested in a polytomy with three clusters of species from outside section Melongena. Furthermore, the phylogeny indicates that dioecy has evolved either once or twice in Australian Solanum, possibly from andromonoecious ancestry.
S1560	J. C. Montero-Castro;A. Delgado-Salinas;E. D. Luna;L. E. Eguiarte	2006	Phylogenetic analysis of Cestrum section Habrothamnus (Solanaceae) based on plastid and nuclear DNA sequences	Systematic Botany							Phylogenetic analysis from chloroplast regions and nuclear ribosomal ITS sequences was conducted to test the monophyly of sect. Habrothamnus and investigate its relationships with other sections of Cestrum. Molecular divergence was very low among the sampled species, suggesting a rapid diversification in Cestrum. Individual and combined analyses of these molecular data sets using maximum parsimony and Bayesian inference reject the monophyly of the traditionally recognized sections of Cestrum, including sect. Habrothamnus. Infrageneric classifications will require significant revision. Nevertheless, the resolved monophyletic clades in this molecular analysis are geographically structured.
S1619	M. J. Moore;R. K. Jansen	2006	The Origins and Biogeography of Gypsophily in the Chihuahuan Desert Plant Group Tiquilia subg. Eddya (Boraginaceae)	Systematic Botany							The gypsophilic flora of the the Chihuahuan Desert forms a large and potentially old edaphic assemblage. We examine the age and biogeography of gypsophily in Tiquilia subg. Eddya, a Chihuahuan Desert plant group entirely composed of gypsophiles (restricted to gypsum) and gypsovags (growing on and off gypsum). A strongly supported phylogeny of the subgenus was generated using sequence data from matK, ndhF, rps16, ITS, and waxy. Combined analyses of these data suggest that the most recent common ancestor of subg. Eddya was a gypsovag and that gypsophily has evolved twice. Individual DNA sequence region analyses that include a broad geographic sampling of all species in the subgenus reveal a complex evolutionary history shared among the narrowly distributed gypsophiles T. tuberculata and T. turneri and the gypsovags T. gossypina and T. mexicana, including putative hybridization. They also reveal a high level of geographically correlated intraspecific variation in the widespread gypsophile T. hispidissima. Gypsophily is inferred to have been present in subg. Eddya by the early Pliocene. The concordance of the biogeographic patterns of gypsophily in subg. Eddya with that of other Chihuahuan Desert gypsophiles suggests that a broad phylogeographic pattern may be shared among many gypsophilic plant groups in this region.
S1642	N. Nagalingum;H. Schneider;K. Pryer	2006	Molecular phylogenetic relationships and morphological evolution in the heterosporous fern genus Marsilea	Systematic Botany							Using six plastid regions, we present a phylogeny for 33 taxa of the heterosporous fern genus Marsilea. Two well-supported groups within Marsilea are identified. Group I includes two subgroups, and is relatively species-poor. Species assignable to this group have glabrous leaves (land leaves may have a few hairs), sporocarps lacking both a raphe and teeth, and share a preference from submerged conditions (i.e., they are intolerant of desiccation). Group II is relatively diverse, and its members have leaves that are pubescent, sporocarps that bear a raphe and from zero to two teeth, and the plants are often emergent at the edges of lakes and ponds. Within Group II, five subgroups receive robust support: three are predominantly African, one is New World, and one Old World. Phylogenetic assessment of morphological evolution suggests that the presence of an inferior sporocarp tooth and the place of sporocarp maturation are homoplastic characters, and are therefore, of unreliable taxonomic use at an infrageneric level. In contrast, the presence of a raphe and superior sporocarp tooth are reliable synapomorphies for classification within Marsilea.
S1570	S. Oh;D. Potter	2006	Description and phylogenetic position of a new angiosperm family, Guamatelaceae, inferred from chloroplast rbcL, atpB, and matK sequences	Systematic Botany							The monotypic genus Guamatela was originally described from Guatemala and has also been collected in Honduras and Mexico. This taxon has been placed in tribe Neillieae of Rosaceae based on its follicular fruits and persistent stipules, but it is anomalous in the tribe due to lack of endosperm, while some of its other characters, such as opposite leaves, lack of well developed hypanthium, and postgenitally fused styles, are unusual for the entire family. No other taxonomic placement has ever been proposed for Guamatela, however, and morphological characters alone do not suggest any likely alternative. We extracted DNA from two herbarium specimens of G. tuerckheimii, one collected in the state of Oaxaca, Mexico in 1969 and the other in Cerro Pinalón, San Augustin Acasaguastlán, Guatemala in 2000. Phylogenetic analyses of the chloroplast rbcL, atpB, and matK genes amplified from the materials, along with sequences from representatives of most major groups in eudicots, strongly support Guamatela as a member of the rosid order Crossosomatales as circumscribed in APG II. None of the molecular data support the inclusion of Guamatela in any described family in the order, and the unique combination of morphological characters of the genus would not fit the description of any of those families. Based on these results, we here proposed a new family name Guamatelaceae to accommodate this genus.
S1531	T. Ohi-Toma;T. Sugawara;M. Murata;S. Wanke;C. Neinhuis;J. Murata	2006	Molecular Phylogeny of Aristolochia sensu lato (Aristolochiaceae) based on Sequences of rbcL, matK, and PHYA Genes, with Special Reference to Differentiation of Chromosome Numbers	Systematic Botany							The genus Aristolochia sensu lato contains over 400 species from warm temperate to tropical regions worldwide. Taxonomic treatments of Aristolochia have been ambiguous and controversial. In a recent cladistic analysis based on morphological characters, it was proposed that the genus should be divided into four genera in two subtribes. To reconsider the systematics of Aristolochia sensu lato, we reconstructed its phylogeny based on nucleotide sequences of the chloroplast rbcL gene and the nuclear-encoded phytochrome A (PHYA) gene for 19 representative species and the chloroplast matK gene of over 80 species. All phylogenetic trees produced with the three genes indicate that Aristolochia sensu lato is a monophyletic group, consisting of two lineages that correspond to the subtribes Aristolochiinae and Isotrematinae. The matK phylogeny shows that each of the lineages includes two sublineages. The Aristolochiinae clade is composed of the Aristolochia sensu stricto and Pararistolochia clades, and the Isotrematinae clade of the Isotrema and Endodeca clades. Chromosome numbers, including newly reported counts for 30 species, are predominantly congruent with the phylogeny: the Aristolochiinae clade shows chromosome numbers of 2n = 6, 12, 14, or 16, while the Isotrematinae clade is characterized by 2n = 32. In the Isotrematinae clade, the paralogous relationships of the PHYA gene suggest that polyploidization might have occurred.
S1526	J. M. Park;S. Kovacic;Z. Liber;W. M. M. Eddie;G. M. Schneeweiss	2006	Phylogeny and biogeography of isophyllous species of Campanula (Campanulaceae) in the Mediterranean area	Systematic Botany							Sequence data from the nuclear internal transcribed spacer (ITS) were used to infer phylogenetic relationships within a morphologically, karyologically, and geographically well-defined group of species of Campanula (Campanulaceae), the Isophylla group. Although belonging to the same clade within the highly paraphyletic Campanula, the Rapunculus clade, members of the Isophylla group do not form a monophyletic group but fall into three separate clades: (i) C. elatines and C. elatinoides in the Alps; (ii) C. fragilis s. l. and C. isophylla with an amphi-Tyrrhenian distribution; and (iii) the garganica clade with an amphi-Adriatic distribution, comprised of C. fenestrellata s. l., C. garganica s. l., C. portenschlagiana, C. poscharskyana, and C. reatina. Taxa currently classified as subspecies of C. garganica (garganica, cephallenica, acarnanica) and C. fenestrellata subsp. debarensis are suggested to be best considered separate species. Molecular dating, although hampered by the lack of fossil evidence, agrees with the hypothesis that the diversification within the garganica clade was triggered by the climatic oscillations and corresponding sea-level changes during the late Pliocene and Pleistocene. Dispersal-vicariance analysis suggests that the garganica clade originated east of the Adriatic Sea, from where it reached the Apennine Peninsula.
S1484	P. J. Rudall;R. M. Bateman	2006	Morphological phylogenetic analysis of Pandanales: testing contrasting hypotheses of floral evolution	Systematic Botany							Recent molecular phylogenetic analyses prompted recircumscription of Pandanales into five families ˆ Cyclanthaceae, Pandanaceae, Stemonaceae, and Velloziaceae, plus the mycoheterotrophic Triuridaceae ˆ that were not hitherto regarded as closely related and so have not previously been compared in detail. Some species exhibit anomalous floral features, including apparently secondary apocarpy, loss of trimery, and an imprecise boundary between inflorescence and flower. Most noteworthy are the female reproductive structures of Triuridaceae, especially the "inside-out" flowers of Lacandonia. A phylogenetic cladistic analysis using 39 morphological characters of 23 genera spanning all five families of Pandanales yielded three fairly well-resolved and moderately supported most-parsimonious trees. Velloziaceae were sister to all other Pandanales. Cyclanthaceae and Pandanaceae formed a sister pair that was sister to Stemonaceae plus Triuridaceae. Triuridaceae were embedded within a paraphyletic Stemonaceae. Pentastemona was sister to all other Stemonaceae plus Triuridaceae, supporting earlier suggestions that this highly divergent genus should be recognized as a separate family, Pentastemonaceae. Kupea was robustly placed as the basally-divergent node of Triuridaceae, upholding an earlier hypothesis that the biovulate condition in Kupea could represent the ancestral condition for Triuridaceae. Contrasting models are outlined for interpretation of the unusual apocarpous female floral units of Triuridaceae, either as (1) highly reduced partial inflorescences (pseudanthia), (2) inflorescence-like flowers derived by carpel multiplication (delayed determinacy) from an ancestor with a single free carpel (with flowers similar to those of Croomia, but unisexual), or (3) flowers derived from a tricarpellate syncarpous ancestor (with flowers similar to those of Pentastemona, but unisexual) by loss of carpel fusion and carpel multiplication. The formerly unsuspected close relationship between Stemonaceae and Triuridaceae supports the second model. The indistinct inflorescence&#8722;flower boundary in Triuridaceae could be attributable to an overlap in genetic programs, resulting either from a partial loss of integrity in regulation of flower development or from extreme axial condensation associated with the mycoheterotrophic habit.
S1615	P. J. Rudall;R. M. Bateman	2006	Morphological phylogenetic analysis of Pandanales: Testing contrasting hypotheses of floral evolution	Systematic Botany	31		223-238				Recent molecular phylogenetic analyses prompted recircumscription of Pandanales into five families ˆ Cyclanthaceae, Pandanaceae, Stemonaceae, and Velloziaceae, plus the mycoheterotrophic Triuridaceae ˆ that were not hitherto regarded as closely related and so have not previously been compared in detail. Some species exhibit anomalous floral features, including apparently secondary apocarpy, loss of trimery, and an imprecise boundary between inflorescence and flower. Most noteworthy are the female reproductive structures of Triuridaceae, especially the "inside-out" flowers of Lacandonia. A phylogenetic cladistic analysis using 39 morphological characters of 23 genera spanning all five families of Pandanales yielded three fairly well-resolved and moderately supported most-parsimonious trees. Velloziaceae were sister to all other Pandanales. Cyclanthaceae and Pandanaceae formed a sister pair that was sister to Stemonaceae plus Triuridaceae. Triuridaceae were embedded within a paraphyletic Stemonaceae. Pentastemona was sister to all other Stemonaceae plus Triuridaceae, supporting earlier suggestions that this highly divergent genus should be recognized as a separate family, Pentastemonaceae. Kupea was robustly placed as the basally-divergent node of Triuridaceae, upholding an earlier hypothesis that the biovulate condition in Kupea could represent the ancestral condition for Triuridaceae. Contrasting models are outlined for interpretation of the unusual apocarpous female floral units of Triuridaceae, either as (1) highly reduced partial inflorescences (pseudanthia), (2) inflorescence-like flowers derived by carpel multiplication (delayed determinacy) from an ancestor with a single free carpel (with flowers similar to those of Croomia, but unisexual), or (3) flowers derived from a tricarpellate syncarpous ancestor (with flowers similar to those of Pentastemona, but unisexual) by loss of carpel fusion and carpel multiplication. The formerly unsuspected close relationship between Stemonaceae and Triuridaceae supports the second model. The indistinct inflorescence&#8722;flower boundary in Triuridaceae could be attributable to an overlap in genetic programs, resulting either from a partial loss of integrity in regulation of flower development or from extreme axial condensation associated with the mycoheterotrophic habit.
S1556	I. Sánchez-del Pino;H. F. Olvera	2006	Phylogeny of Tidestromia (Amaranthaceae, Gomphrenoideae) based on morphology	Systematic Botany							The North American genus Tidestromia (Amaranthaceae: Gomphrenoideae), with high levels of endemism in the Chihuahuan Desert, is subjected to phylogenetic analysis using 19 morphological characters. Species from genera most closely related to Tidestromia (Alternanthera, Froelichia, Gossypianthus, and Guilleminea), as well as the more distantly related genus Iresine, were used as outgroups. The monophyly of Tidestromia is well supported by four synapomorphies: alternate leaves, dichasial inflorescences, and pollen that is psilate (homoplasious) and with mesoporia that are narrowed distally. The single most parsimonious tree resolved T. valdesiana as sister to the rest of Tidestromia, which is apomorphically diagnosed by the presence of involucres. The annual habit supports a clade comprising T. carnosa, T. lanuginosa, and T. tenella , which is nested among the species with involucres. The phylogenetic relationships of the rest of the taxa remain unresolved. Traditional morphological evidence thus is important for circumscribing the genus Tidestromia, but shows limited utility for resolving species groups within this genus.
S1589	J. G. Sánchez-Ken;L. G. Clark;E. E. Kay;E. A. Kellogg	2006	Emendation and reinstatement of the subfamily Micrairoideae (Poaceae)	Systematic Botany							Phylogenetic relationships among subfamilies of the well supported PACCAD clade of Poaceae remain uncertain. Several genera such as Micraira and Eriachne were considered incertae sedis in the most recent subfamilial classification of the grasses, but these two genera formed a well supported clade in an analysis based on chloroplast and structural data. Another genus, Isachne, traditionally classified in the Panicoideae, also formed part of this well supported clade. Despite strong molecular support for the clade, thus far no morphological synapomorphy has been found. Nevertheless, the strongly supported monophyly of this clade allowed us to suggest the recognition of a new subfamily within the PACCAD clade. Since there was already a name available, in this paper we propose the reinstatement and emendation of the circumscription of Micrairoideae. The reinstatement of Micrairoideae changes the acronym PACCAD to PACCMAD for this large clade of grasses.
S1510	A. N. Schmidt-Lebuhn;M. Kessler;M. Kumar	2006	Promiscuity in the Andes: Species relationships in Polylepis (Rosaceae, Sanguisorbeae) based on AFLP and morphology	Systematic Botany							AFLP and morphological data were used to reconstruct the phylogeny of Polylepis (Rosaceae). Results from the morphological analysis correlate well with earlier hypotheses about the evolution of the genus, showing a transition from tall, thin-leaved trees with large inflorescences to small trees with thick leaves and reduced inflorescences. While a basic phylogenetic signal is also discernible in the AFLP analysis, it is partly eclipsed in that samples from different species sometimes cluster according to geographic proximity rather than systematic affiliation. This structure is interpreted as indicative of frequent hybridization and introgression.
S1371	H. Schneider;H. P. Kreier;R. Wilson;A. R. Smith	2006	The Synammia enigma: evidence for a temperate lineage of polygrammoid ferns (Polypodiaceae, Polypodiidae) in southern South America	Systematic Botany	31		31-41				Evidence for a southern South American lineage of polygrammoid ferns was inferred from analyses using four cpDNA markers. The lineage corresponds to the genus Synammia, which has usually been treated as a synonym of the polyphlyletic genus Polypodium. Seven specimens of two of the three recognized species were sampled to infer the phylogenetic relationships of this lineage to other polygrammoid ferns and the diversity within this lineage. All approaches found Synammia clearly separated from other polygrammoid ferns, but the exact relationships are still unclear. Model-based methods recovered Synammia as sister to a mainly neotropical clade of polygrammoid ferns, but support for this hypothesis was provided only by Bayesian inference of phylogeny. The deletion of nearly the whole rps4-trnS IGS is a synapomorphy of Synammia. The lineage is separated from other extant polygrammoid ferns, but very low to zero sequence diversity was found among the seven samples of Synammia. The results strongly support an independent lineage of polygrammoid ferns in southern South America.
S1492	B. B. Simpson;L. L. Larkin;A. Weeks;J. R. McDill	2006	Phylogeny and biogeography of Pomaria (Caesalpinioideae: Leguminosae)	Systematic Botany							Pomaria, traditionally placed in Hoffmannseggia or Caesalpinia, is shown to be a well-supported group of 15 species related to the Erythrostemon group of Caesalpinia sensu lato. Monophyly is well supported by analyses of both nuclear and chloroplast DNA data and by the presence of several unique morphological characters. Nine species of the genus are distributed in the arid and montane regions of the southwestern United States and adjacent Mexico, three species occur in temperate eastern South America, and three species are native to southern Africa. The genus thus exhibits both a New World amphitropical and a New World-African amphi-Atlantic distribution pattern. A biogeographical analysis suggests two dispersals within the genus account for the present distribution: one from North America to Africa and second from North America to South America.
S1656	V. A. Sosa	2006	Molecular and morphological phylogenetic study of subtribe Bletiinae (Epidendreae, Orchidaceae)	Systematic Botany							Subtribe Bletiinae is comprised of three neotropical, terrestrial, deciduous genera: Basiphyllaea, Bletia and Hexalectris. Morphological, molecular (ITS and trnL-F IGS DNA sequences) and combined phylogenetic analyses of subtribe Bletiinae (Epidendreae, Orchidaceae) were performed in order to estimate the relationships of the genera and species. Morphological analyses retrieved 84 trees poorly supported by homoplastic characters and resolved the seven species of Basiphyllaea in a clade sustained by four synapomorphic characters. Molecular and combined analyses retrieved almost identical trees in which the species of Bletia are in a clade with no support. Results indicate that in subtribe Bletiinae there is a trend from achlorophyllous plants lacking leaves to chlorophyllous plants with tuberoid stems with small shoots and conduplicate leaves to plants with plicate leaves with vertical corms.
S1398	C. D. Specht	2006	Systematics and Evolution of the Tropical Monocot Family Costaceae (Zingiberales): A Multiple Dataset Approach	Systematic Botany	31	1					A phylogenetic analysis of molecular (ITS, trnL-F, trnK including the matK coding region) and morphological data is presented for the pantropical monocot family Costaceae (Zingiberales), including 65 Costaceae taxa and two species of the outgroup genus Siphonochilus (Zingiberaceae). Taxon sampling included all four currently described genera in order to test the monophyly of previously proposed taxonomic groups. Sampling was further designed to encompass geographical and morphological diversity of the family to identify trends in biogeographic patterns and morphological character evolution. Phylogenetic analysis of the combined data reveals three major clades with discrete biogeographic distribution: (1) South American, (2) Asian, and (3) African-neotropical. The nominal genus Costus is not monophyletic and its species are found in all three major clades. The Melanesian genus Tapeinochilos is monophyletic and included within the Asian clade. Monocostus and Dimerocostus are sister taxa and form part of the South American clade. The African-neotropical clade is composed entirely of the genus Costus; moreover, there is support for previously recognized subgeneric groupings within the Costus clade. Evolutionary trends in floral morphology show that close associations with pollinators have evolved several times from an ancestral generalist pollinator floral form. Bee pollination has evolved once in the family, arising in Africa from an open-flowered (generalist) ancestor. Bird pollination has evolved multiple times: once from an open-flowered ancestor in Southeast Asia and multiple times from a bee-pollinated ancestor in the neotropics. Additional morphological characters not traditionally used to define taxonomic groups, but having high consistency in the current phylogenetic analysis, are discussed.
S1580	J. Syring;R. d Castillo;R. Cronn;A. Liston	2006	Multiple nuclear loci reveal the distinctiveness of the threatened, neotropical Pinus chiapensis (Pinaceae)	Systematic Botany							Pinus chiapensis is a threatened species of pine from southern Mexico and northwestern Guatemala. It was first described as a disjunct variety of the widespread P. strobus from the eastern United States and southeastern Canada. Prior morphological work has suggested that P. chiapensis is a distinct species, but not all authors and pine systematists have accepted that taxonomy. In this study we sequenced multiple accessions from across the range of each of the three most probable progenitors of P. chiapensis at three nuclear loci. Pinus chiapensis had the lowest combined nucleotide diversity of any of the four species (0.0031), and had only a single allele across its entire range at one of the loci. Pinus chiapensis does not share alleles with any of the possible progenitors and the alleles for this pine are monophyletic at two of the three loci. Constraint topologies forcing allelic monophyly at the third locus are not statistically different from the unconstrained trees. While the results are conclusive that P. chiapensis is at least as distinct as the remaining three widely accepted species, determination of the sister species is complicated by lack of species monophyly and interlocus variability. The sympatrically occurring P. ayacahuite, which has been cited as having the potential to hybridize with P. chiapensis, was determined as the least likely progenitor with no evidence for introgression uncovered. The data are conflicting as to whether P. monticola or P. strobus is more closely related to P. chiapensis. Lacking knowledge of the sister species, any phylogeographic story is premature. Rangewide population sampling of P. chiapensis failed to uncover any consistent population structure as has been supported in other studies. The loss of habitat and overexploitation of this resource, in combination with extremely limited genetic diversity, make conservation of P. chiapensis a high priority.
S1457	M. C. Tebbitt;L. L. Forrest;A. Santoriello;W. L. Clement;S. M. Swensen	2006	A Phylogeny of Begonia Using Nuclear Ribosomal Sequence Data and Morphological Characters	Systematic Botany							While most Begonia species have a similar fruit morphology that shows adaptations to wind dispersal, a few species have atypical fruits and are adapted to either animal or rain dispersal. Such differences in fruit morphology have traditionally been emphasized in sectional classifications of Begonia and some of the currently recognized sections can only be distinguished using ovary and fruit characteristics. We evaluated the monophyly and evolution of three Asian sections with atypical fruit morphologies: Platycentrum, Sphenanthera, and Leprosae, along with members of nine other Asian sections with fruit morphologies typical of wind dispersed Begonia. A parsimony analysis of nrDNA ITS/ 5.8S sequence data of 46 Asian Begonia species suggests that the members of section Platycentrum, which have fruit morphologies indicative of rain dispersal, evolved from wind dispersed Asian taxa following the colonization of wetter habitats. From within this rain dispersed group, species of section Sphenanthera with fleshy, animal dispersed fruits subsequently evolved on multiple occasions. Member of section Leprosae, which have fleshy fruit, evolved on two separate occasions, in one case independently of the members of the sections Platycentrum and Sphenanthera. As currently recognized sections Platycentrum, Sphenanthera and Leprosae are polyphyletic.
S1521	M. Thiv;M. Thulin;N. Kilian;H. P. Linder	2006	Eritreo-Arabian Affinities of the Socotran Flora as Revealed from the Molecular Phylogeny of Aerva (Amaranthaceae)	Systematic Botany	31	3					We investigated the colonization of the Indian Ocean archipelago of Socotra through phylogenetic analysis of Aerva (Amaranthaceae) based on nuclear and plastid DNA sequence data. The biogeographic history of the genus was tracked using ancestral area reconstructions and molecular dating. Three independent colonization lineages from the Eritreo-Arabian subregion of the Sudano-Zambesian Region were revealed: one endemic clade comprising Aerva revoluta/A. microphylla and once within A. lanata and A. javanica. Our results provide further support for the dominance of Eritreo-Arabian affinities in the flora of Socotra, in contrast to more rare affinities to Madagascar, the Mascarenes, southern Africa, and tropical Asia. Our data point towards colonization via dispersal, rather than a vicariance origin of the island elements. The overall biogeographic patterns of Aerva show only limited concordance with other taxonomic groups distributed on Indian Ocean islands.
S1288	K. Tremetsberger;T. F. Stuessy;G. Kadlec;E. Urtubey;C. M. Baeza;S. G. Beck;H. A. Valdebenito;C. F. Ruas;N. I. Matzenbacher	2006	AFLP phylogeny of South American species of Hypochaeris (Asteraceae, Lactuceae)	Systematic Botany	31	3	610-626				Hypochaeris is thought to have arrived in South America by dispersal over the Atlantic Ocean from NW Africa during the Pliocene or Pleistocene. We used amplified fragment length polymorphism (AFLP) to unravel specific limits and relationships in the South American group of Hypochaeris (c. 40 species). The Moroccan endemic H. angustifolia, which is sister to the entire South American group, was used as outgroup. Our AFLP analysis comprises 415 individuals from 32 South American species and is based on six primer combinations with 670 fragments scored. It provides important information for the delimitation of species and detection of closely related species pairs or groups. Most species are monophyletic and supported with > 90 % bootstrap proportion. Hybridization is suggested between H. chillensis and H. microcephala in Brazil. The basal nodes (or „backbone‰) of the phylogenetic tree are not highly supported, but four major groups (also showing similarity in distribution and growth form) center around H. tenuifolia, H. sessiliflora, H. microcephala, and H. pampasica. These results suggest that rapid migration into different geographical regions played an important role in the initial diversification of Hypochaeris in South America.
S1421	L. Wanntorp;A. Kocyan;R. v Donkelaar;Renner;S. S	2006	Towards a Monophyletic Hoya (Marsdenieae, Apocynaceae): Inferences from the Chloroplast trnL Region and the rbcL-atpB Spacer	Systematic Botany							The delimitation of the genus Hoya, with 200-300 species distributed from India and China to Australia, from its closest relatives in the Marsdenieae has long been problematic, precluding an understanding of the evolution and biogeography of the genus. Traditional circumscriptions of genera in the Hoya alliance have relied on features of the flower, but these overlap extensively between genera and may be evolutionarily labile. We obtained chloroplast DNA sequences to infer the phylogenetic relationships among a sample of 35 taxa of Hoya and 11 other genera in the tribe Marsdenieae, namely Absolmsia, Cionura, Dischidia, Dregea, Gongronema, Gunnessia, Madangia, Marsdenia, Micholitzia, Rhyssolobium, and Telosma. Trees were rooted with representatives of Asclepiadeae, Ceropegieae, Fockeeae, Periplocoideae, and Secamonoideae. Hoya and Dischidia form a monophyletic group, but the phylogenetic signal in the chloroplast data analyzed here was insufficient to statistically support the mutual monophyly of the two genera. A monophyletic Hoya must include the monotypic Absolmsia, Madangia, and Micholitzia, a result congruent with their flower morphology. The data also identified several well-supported groups within Hoya. The morphologically unusual Gunnessia belongs firmly in the Marsdenieae, but is not close to Hoya and Dischidia.
S1626	T. L. Weese;L. Bohs	2006	A three gene phylogeny of the genus Solanum	Systematic Botany							Solanum, with approximately 1,500 species, is the largest genus in the Solanaceae and includes economically important species such as the tomato, potato, and eggplant. In part due to its large size and tropical center of diversity, resolving evolutionary relationships across Solanum as a whole has been challenging. In order to identify major clades within Solanum and to gain insight into phylogenetic relationships among these clades, we sampled 102 Solanum species and seven outgroup taxa for three DNA sequence regions (chloroplast ndhF and trnT-F and nuclear waxy) and analyzed the data using parsimony and Bayesian methods. The same major Solanum clades were identified by each data partition, and the combined analysis provided the best resolved hypothesis of relationships within the genus. Our data suggest that most currently recognized Solanum subgenera are not monophyletic. The Thelopodium clade is sister to the rest of Solanum, which is split into two large clades. These two large clades are further divided into at least 10 subclades, for which informal names are provided and morphological synapomorphies are proposed. The identification of these subclades provides a framework for directed sampling in further phylogenetic studies and identifies natural groups for focused revisionary work.
S1623	A. H. Wortley;D. J. Harris;R. W. Scotland	2006	On the taxonomy and phylogenetic position of Thomandersia	Systematic Botany							The taxonomy and phylogenetic position of Thomandersia have been investigated through a comprehensive study of herbarium specimens and analyses of DNA sequence and non-sequence data. Phylogenetic analysis of all available evidence placed Thomandersia within Lamiales but outside Acanthaceae, the family in which it has traditionally been classified. Moreover, Thomandersia is shown to be a morphologically distinct clade, lying outside all currently circumscribed families of Lamiales. We therefore propose resurrection of family Thomandersiaceae. Phylogenetic analyses provide moderate support for a sister group relationship between Thomandersiaceae and Schlegeliaceae. In addition, the morphological variation within and between species is described and six species are recognised. A new taxonomic treatment of these six species, including an improved key, descriptions, illustrations and distribution maps, is provided.
S1572	M. L. Zhang;C. H. Uhink;J. W. Kadereit	2006	The Phylogeny and Biogeography of Epimedium/Vancouveria (Berberidaceae): Western North American - East Asian Disjunctions, the Origin of European Mountain Plant Taxa and East Asian Specific Diversity	Systematic Botany							Using ITS and atpB-rbcL spacer sequences of 38 (of 55) species of the highly disjunct Eurasian/North African Epimedium and all three species of its western North American sister genus Vancouveria we reconstructed the phylogeny of these two genera and dated major splits with a molecular clock approach. Epimedium was found to be monophyletic with a stem age dated to between 9.7 and 7.4 million years ago (My). Within Epimedium, almost all sections as recognized in the most recent classification of the genus were found to be monophyletic but subg. Epimedium was found to be paraphyletic in relation to subg. Rhizophyllum. Range formation in Eurasia proceeded as follows: In a first step the western Himalayan part of the generic distribution area (sect. Polyphyllon) was separated from the remainder, followed by a split between the Chinese distribution area (sect. Diphyllon) and the remainder, the separation of the highly disjunct range of E. pinnatum from the Caucasus plus E. perralderianum from North Africa (subg. Rhizophyllum) and the remainder, and in a last step the separation of the European E. alpinum plus the Turkish E. pubigerum from the range of the genus in Japan, Korea, northeastern China and Far Eastern Russia (sects. Epimedium and Macroceras). These results imply that the European mountain species are not most closely related to taxa in mountain areas towards the east (e.g., Caucasus, Himalayas) but rather to taxa in the Far East. Accordingly, in Epimedium the link between western Eurasia and eastern Asia apparently was not through intervening mountain regions but probably through a more northerly deciduous forest belt which does not exist any longer. The largest number of species of Epimedium is found in China (sect. Diphyllon: 44 species mainly in Hubei, Sichuan and Guizhou provinces). The age of this clade was dated to 0.52 to 0.4 My. This implies that the diversification of this group probably is the result of frequent range shifts in the Quaternary. Keywords: atpB-rbcL spacer, DIVA, ITS, molecular clock, Quaternary diversification.
S1528	F. O. Zuloaga;L. M. Giussani;O. Morrone	2006	On the Taxonomic Position of Panicum aristellum (Poaceae: Panicoideae: Paniceae)	Systematic Botany							In a recent treatment, the genus Panicum was restricted to subgenus Panicum based on molecular, morphological, and anatomical data. Also, other species of Panicum were transferred to different genera of the Paniceae, such as Dichanthelium, Hymenachne, Phanopyrum, and Steinchisma, while the remaining American species of Panicum were temporarily placed as incertae sedis taxa. Therefore, these incertae sedis species are in need of a new taxonomic status within the tribe. In this study, the taxonomic position of Panicum aristellum, an endemic species of central and southeastern Brazil, is evaluated using morphological and anatomical characters, together with sequence data from ndhF, a molecular marker from the chloroplast. The sequence of Panicum aristellum was analyzed together with other species of the subfamily Panicoideae. This species grouped with the genus Canastra in a well supported clade. Several synapomorphies characterized the clade: caespitose plants, keeled sheaths, aristate spikelets, scabrous bracts, the number of nerves of the glumes and lower lemma, the presence of a lower palea and lower flower, a non-indurate upper anthecium, and a similar geographical distribution. In addition, both species are C3 with non-Kranz anatomy. As a result, the new combination Canastra aristella is proposed and the species is compared to putatively related genera within the Paniceae.
S1409	E. Schuettpelz;S. B. Hoot	2006	Inferring the root of Isoëtes: exploring alternatives in the absence of an acceptable outgroup	Systematic Botany	31	2	258-270	10.1600/036364406777585856			The ancient divergence between the lycopsid genus Isoëtes and its closest living relative (Selaginella) has resulted in considerable morphological and genetic disparity, yet within Isoëtes there is remarkable morphological and genetic uniformity. This has made it difficult to identify the phylogenetic root of the genus. In this study, we addressed this problem and characterized the early branching patterns within Isoëtes using an expanded set of taxa and three molecular markers. We assessed the saturation in the molecular data sets, tested for differences in evolutionary rate, determined the stability of the ingroup topology, and evaluated the applicability of the molecular clock. We then explored three alternative rooting approaches: outgroup, midpoint, and maximum likelihood under the assumption of a molecular clock. Attempts to infer the root of Isoëtes using the outgroup approach were severely hindered by the effects of saturation, but the results from midpoint rooting and the enforcement of the molecular clock were highly consistent among the data sets. We identify the root of Isoëtes to be located among three major, highly supported clades.
S1913	J. S. Boatwright;V. Savolainen;B. E. V. Wyk;A. L. Schutte-Vlok;F. Forest;M. V. d Bank	2007	Systematic position of the anomolous genus Cadia and the phylogeny of the tribe Podalyrieae (Fabaceae)	Systematic Botany							The tribe Podalyrieae is a group of papilionoid legumes that are largely endemic to the Cape Floristic Region of South Africa, possessing fire survival strategies with both non-sprouting and sprouting species. A phylogenetic study of the tribe was undertaken using gene sequences obtained from the internal transcribed spacer (ITS) of nuclear ribosomal DNA as well as the plastid rbcL gene (107 species). Several clades were identified within the tribe. The subtribe Xiphothecinae consists of the genera Amphithalea and Xiphotheca. The subtribe Podalyriinae was found to be paraphyletic. Liparia (except L. calycina) and Podalyria are sister genera with Stirtonanthus sister to both of these. While Podalyria and Stirtonanthus are monophyletic, the monophyly of Liparia is still uncertain. Virgilia and Calpurnia are closely related and Cyclopia retains an isolated, monophyletic position within the tribe. Cadia is monophyletic and sister to the rest of the Podalyrieae. The placement of this genus has until now been uncertain due to their actinomorphic flowers that are unusual among papilionoid legumes. The data from this study indicate that actinomorphic flowers may be interpreted as an apomorphy for Cadia and it shares many characters with Podalyrieae. We therefore propose that Cadia be transferred to Podalyrieae from the paraphyletic tribe Sophoreae. The age of the root node of the tribe Podalyrieae s.s. was estimated at 30.5 ± 2.6 million years (Ma) using non-parametric rate smoothing (NPRS) and 34.7 Ma (confidence intervals: 25.1-44.1 Ma), using a Bayesian relaxed clock, indicating that a major radiation has taken place during the middle to late Miocene and early Pliocene. Finally, we performed a comparative analysis and found that non-sprouting species have a higher rate of molecular evolution than sprouting species.
S1730	A. Bruneau;J. R. Starr;S. Joly	2007	Phylogenetic relationships in the genus Rosa: new evidence from chloroplast DNA sequences and appraisal of current knowledge	Systematic Botany							The genus Rosa (roses) comprises approximately 190 shrub species distributed widely throughout the temperate and subtropical habitats of the northern hemisphere. Despite numerous recent studies examining phylogenetic relationships in the genus, relationships remain obscure due to problems such as poor identification of garden specimens, hybridization in nature and in the garden, and low-levels of chloroplast and nuclear genome variation. Phylogenetic analyses of non-coding chloroplast sequences from the trnL-F region and psbA-trnH intergenic spacer for 70 taxa show slightly more variation than previous analyses of the genus. Bayesian and parsimony analyses suggest that subg. Rosa can be divided into two large clades, each with low internal resolution. One comprises species from sections Carolinae, Cinnamomeae and Pimpinellifoliae p.p., whilst the other consists of all of the remaining sections of subg. Rosa (Banksianae p.p., Bracteatae, Caninae, Indicae, Laevigatae, Rosa, Synstylae and Pimpinellifoliae p.p.). A fairly complete sampling of field-collected North American taxa has been incorporated in this analysis. Analyses indicate that migration into North American occurred at least twice within this primarily Old World genus. Most North American taxa, except R. setigera and R. minutifolia, fall into a single clade that includes Asian and European taxa. Analyses also are consistent with the notion that cultivated commercial roses have a relatively narrow genetic background. Six of the seven primary taxa believed to be involved in the creation of domesticated roses are found within the same large clade that mostly includes Asian and European taxa.
S1835	K. A. Cariaga;J. F. Pruski;R. Oviedo;A. A. Anderberg;C. E. Lewis;J. Francisco-Ortega	2007	Phylogeny and Systematic Position of Feddea (Asteraceae: Feddeeae): A Taxonomically Enigmatic and Critically Endangered Genus Endemic to Cuba	Systematic Botany							The systematic position of Feddea (Asteraceae) has been enigmatic ever since its publication in 1925. The latest taxonomic accounts of the family left it either unplaced within subfamily Asteroideae or unplaced within tribe Inuleae. Macro-morphological and electron microscopy data (Scanning electron microscopy and Transmission electron microscopy) indicated that Feddea is not part of an early branching lineages of the Asteraceae, contrary to what had been suggested in initial taxonomic accounts. Feddea has style branches with a 2-banded (vs. continuous) stigmatic surface, thus differing from early diverging lineages of the family. Among Asteroideae, Feddea is diagnosed by discoid capitula with all florets bisexual, long-caudate anthers, non-carbonized cypselae, and pollen with a narrow cavus region, columellae without internal foramina, but with a complex basal columellate layer. A phylogenetic reconstruction based on nucleotide sequences of the chloroplast gene ndhF showed that Feddea is sister to the Heliantheae s.l. There were, however, no clear morphological synapomorphies shared with that tribe and we therefore propose Feddeeae as a new unispecific tribe to accommodate this critically endangered genus restricted to Eastern Cuba.
S1720	A. M. Cialdella;L. M. Giussani;L. Aagesen;F. O. Zuloaga;O. Morrone	2007	A Phylogeny of Piptochaetium (Poaceae: Pooideae: Stipeae) and Related Genera Based on a Combined Analysis, including trnL-F, rpl16 and Morphology	Systematic Botany							The tribe Stipeae occurs in te mperate and warm temperate grasslands of Eurasia, Australia, and America. Although generic circumscription within the tribe has recently undergone significant changes, the American genus Piptochaetium has been clearly defined by morphological and anatomical characters. It includes 36 species and 2 varieties, most of them widely distributed in temperate grasslands of South America. Phylogenetic analyses were conducted in Piptochaetium and allied genera of the Stipeae, in order to test the monophyly of the genus, re-examine infrageneric taxa, and analyze relationships among species of this genus and allied genera of Stipeae. Two chloroplast molecular markers, trnL-F and rpl16, as well as morphology were used. Topology between morphological and molecular data mainly differs in the relationships of Piptochaetium with Anatherostipa and Piptatherum. Molecular and combined analyses yielded two major clades in the tribe: the x = 11 Clade with Piptochaetium, Aciachne, Anatherostipa, and Jarava vaginata, and the Aneuploid Clade with Jarava, Nassella, and Piptatherum. Monophyly of Piptochaetium was confirmed by morphological and total evidence (morphology and DNA data) analyses. Monophyly of sect. Podopogon, sect. Piptochaetium and Nassella were only supported by the total evidence analysis. Circumscription of Jarava is also discussed.
S1771	A. Costello;T. J. Motley	2007	Phylogenetics of the Tetraplasandra Group (Araliaceae) inferred from ITS, 5S-NTS, and morphology	Systematic Botany							Tetraplasandra, Reynoldsia, and Munroidendron form a complex of closely related genera (14 species) distributed from Tahiti, Samoa, and the Marquesas, to the Hawaiian archipelago. In this paper, we investigate evolutionary relationships within this group using morphological and DNA sequence variation to test the monophyly of the Hawaiian species (the Tetraplasandra group), generic limits of Tetraplasandra, Reynoldsia, and Munroidendron, and the validity of current classifications. Parsimony analyses using two molecular markers, the internal transcribed spacer (ITS) and the 5S non-transcribed spacer (5S-NTS) of the nuclear rDNA genes, and 39 morphological and anatomical characters were conducted using all species of Tetraplasandra (excluding the recently resurrected species T. lydgatei), Reynoldsia, and Munroidendron, plus three species (four for morphological data) of the outgroup genus Gastonia. The results support a monophyletic Hawaiian Tetraplasandra group, a sister relationship between Munroidendron and R. sandwicensis, and a polyphyletic Reynoldsia. Here we build on previous molecular analyses of the Tetraplasandra group and propose the next steps necessary to recognize new generic boundaries. Changes in floral morphology within Tetraplasandra correspond to monophyletic groupings. Species with hypogynous flowers cluster together and species with floral characters suggestive of ornithophily cluster together.
S1686	T. L. P. Couvreur;W. J. Hahn;J. J. de Granville;J. L. Pham;B. Ludeña;J. C. Pintaud	2007	Phylogenetic relationships of the cultivated Neotropical palm Bactris gasipaes (Arecaceae) with its wild relatives inferred from chloroplastic and nuclear DNA polymorphisms	Systematic Botany							Peach palm (Bactris gasipaes Kunth.) is the only Neotropical palm domesticated since pre-Columbian times. It plays an important role not only at the local level due to its very nutritious fruits, but also in the international market for its gourmet palm heart. Phylogenetic relationships of the peach palm with wild Bactris taxa are still in doubt, and have never been addressed using molecular sequence data. We generated a chloroplast DNA phylogeny using intergenic spacers from a sampling of cultivars of Bactris gasipaes as well as putative wild relatives and other members of the genus Bactris. We estimated phylogenetic relationships using Maximum Parsimony (MP), Maximum Likelihood (ML) and Bayesian analysis. Our results indicated a close affinity between three taxa: Bactris gasipaes var. gasipaes, B. gasipaes var. chichagui, and B. riparia. There was no clear differentiation between these three taxa at the level of chloroplast sequences, and they shared a unique inversion that we characterized in this paper. Bactris setulosa, a species potentially related to the Bactris gasipaes complex, appeared highly divergent, and seemed to be a composite taxon with affinities outside the complex. We also investigated nuclear microsatellite polymorphisms at 8 loci within Bactris gasipaes, B. riparia, and B. setulosa, finding a pattern of relationships in agreement with the cpDNA data. The results presented here are important for future studies on domestication and crop improvement of Bactris gasipaes.
S1738	A. Cuenca;C. B. Asmussen-Lange	2007	Phylogeny of the palm tribe Chamaedoreeae (Arecaceae) based on plastid DNA sequences	Systematic Botany							This study presents the first phylogenetical analysis of the tribe Chamaedoreeae (Arecaceae), using parsimony and Bayesian analysis of plastid DNA sequences (matK, rps16 intron, 3‚ region of ndhF and trnD-trnT). The tribe includes more than 115 species, and it has a disjunct distribution with four genera in Central and South America and one genus in the Mascarene Islands. While the placement of this tribe within the palm classification has been controversial, the monophyly of the tribe is well supported by plastid DNA sequence data. All the genera in Chamaedoreeae are resolved as monophyletic with high support, but the relationships among genera are not fully resolved. The placement of the genus Hyophorbe and the monotypic genus Wendlandiella as sisters to the remaining genera gives new insight into the study of the evolution of solitary flowers and the dioecism within this palm tribe. Although a low substitution rate of palm plastid DNA has been widely mentioned, the results of this study show high resolution at species level, especially within the largest genus, Chamaedorea, indicating that plastid DNA is useful for the inference of relationships at low taxonomical level in some groups of palms.
S1857	T. F. Daniel;L. A. McDade;M. Manktelow;C. A. Kiel	2007	The "Tetramerium Lineage" (Acanthaceae: Acanthoideae: Justicieae): Delimitation and Infra-lineage Relationships Based on cp and nrITS Sequence Data	Systematic Botany							We used DNA sequence data from five genic regions (nrITS; chloroplast trnL-F, trnT-L, rps16, trnS-G) to study phylogenetic relationships of the Tetramerium lineage (Acanthaceae: Justicieae). From a sample of 70 species (representing 25 genera) previously affiliated with the Tetramerium lineage, 68 are included therein. Our analyses excluded Papuasian Calycacanthus and Neotropical Streblacanthus monospermus from the Tetramerium lineage; however, two species described in Justicia (J. gonzalezii and J. medranoi) and a Malagasy species of uncertain generic affinities are nested within the lineage. A monophyletic Tetramerium lineage consists of 23 currently recognized genera with at least 168 species, more than 70% of which occur in the New World. Old World Chlamydacardia and Clinacanthus are serially sister to all other members of the lineage. Other Old World taxa consist of: Ecbolium clade (all sampled species of Ecbolium plus Malagasy Populina richardii), Megalochlamys clade (Megalochlamys, Trichaulax and the unidentified Malagasy plant), and two isolated taxa (Angkalanthus and Chorisochora). All analyses strongly support monophyly of the New World Tetramerium lineage. The three basal clades of New World plants, all with nototribic flowers, are: the taxonomically heterogeneous but palynologically consistent Mirandea clade, the Pachystachys clade, and the South American Anisacanthus clade. The last two are sister taxa and are together sister to all other New World plants, referred to here as the core Tetramerium lineage. We recognize five clades within the core Tetramerium lineage related as follows: (Henrya clade (Carlowrightia parviflora clade (North American Anisacanthus clade (core Carlowrightia clade + Tetramerium)))). Macromorphological synapomorphies are unknown for the Tetramerium lineage and for many of its constituent clades. However, we propose sternotribic flowers as synapomorphic for the core Tetramerium lineage and flowers with the lower-central lobe of the corolla modified into a keel as synapomorphic for a lineage consisting of Tetramerium and the core Carlowrightia clade. Palynological characters provide putative synapomorphies for some clades (e.g., Ecbolium clade, Mirandea clade) and autapomorphies for several species (e.g., Mexacanthus mcvaughii, Trichaulax mwasumbii). An Old World origin is postulated for the Tetramerium lineage, and we posit a single dispersal event to America and subsequent extensive radiation there, especially in arid zones of Mexico and adjacent regions. Taxonomic implications of our results are extensive. Notably, many traditionally recognized genera (e.g., Anisacanthus, Carlowrightia, Mirandea) are not monophyletic and emphasis on floral form often has been phylogenetically misleading (e.g., floral adaptations to pollination by hummingbirds have evolved at least eight times in the New World Tetramerium lineage).
S1840	J. P. Der;D. L. Nickrent	2007	A Molecular Phylogeny of Santalaceae (Santalales)	Systematic Botany							Santalaceae sensu stricto, the type family for the sandalwood order (Santalales), include approximately 40 genera and over 550 species distributed worldwide. Because the family possesses plesiomorphic and generalized traits that occur throughout the order, this diverse assemblage of hemiparasitic plants has been difficult to characterize and differentiate from related families. We present phylogenetic analyses of all genera of Santalaceae, as well as Viscaceae and selected Opiliaceae, using DNA sequences from nuclear small-subunit ribosomal DNA as well as the chloroplast genes matK and rbcL. The concatenated data set, analyzed with parsimony, likelihood, and Bayesian inference gave congruent results, with the majority of clades fully resolved. Our results reveal that the family is polyphyletic and that the genera of Santalaceae, as traditionally classified, occur in nine well-supported clades. The South American herbaceous perennial genera Arjona and Quinchamalium are sister to Schoepfia (Schoepfiaceae). The Australian genus Anthobolus emerges as a member of Opiliaceae. The remaining genera included in Santalaceae occur in six well-supported clades, however, the relationships among these clades are not fully resolved. These clades are (based on a component generic name), Cervantesia, Thesium, Nanodea, Santalum, Amphorogyne, and Viscum. Morphological features diagnostic of these clades are discussed with the intention that these results will serve as the foundation for a revised classification.
S1854	C. J. Dixon;P. Schönswetter;G. M. Schneeweiss	2007	Morphological and Geographical Evidence are Misleading with Respect to the Phylogenetic Position and Origin of the Narrow Endemic Polyploid Androsace cantabrica (Primulaceae)	Systematic Botany							Allopolyploidy is recognized as an important mode of plant speciation. The allopolyploid origin of a taxon is often inferred from morphological intermediacy or a mixture of morphological characters from the putative parental taxa, especially if accompanied by geographical intermediacy of the polyploid. Here we show that in the case of Androsace cantabrica (Primulaceae) ˜ a narrow endemic from the central Cordillera Cantábrica (Spain) ˜ both lines of evidence are misleading. Instead of being an allopolyploid derivative of A. halleri s. l. (western Cordillera Cantábrica, eastern Pyrenees, Massif Central, Vosges) and A. laggeri (central Pyrenees), A. cantabrica is most likely an autopolyploid closely related to A. adfinis s. l., endemic to the south-western European Alps. This counterintuitive biogeographic connection not only adds to the group of species showing a CantabrianˆAlpine disjunction, but ˜ together with the unexpected link between A. chaixii, also from the south-western Alps, and A. halleri s. l. in form of the northern Spanish local endemic A. rioxana ˜ underlines the important role of large-scale range shifts in shaping the current distribution of European mountain taxa.
S1695	A. N. Doust;A. M. Penly;S. W. L. Jacobs;E. A. Kellogg	2007	Congruence, conflict and polyploidization shown by nuclear and chloroplast markers in the monophyletic ‚Äûbristle clade‚Ä∞ (Paniceae, Panicoideae, Poaceae)	Systematic Botany							ABSTRACT. Molecular phylogenetic analyses using the chloroplast marker ndhF and a single copy nuclear marker, knotted1, show that the panicoid grasses bearing sterile branches (bristles) in their inflorescences form a monophyletic group. The genus Cenchrus is monophyletic, and monophyly of Pennisetum cannot be ruled out. Setaria is not monophyletic, either as a whole or without various uncertainly placed species such as S. grisebachii. The Australian genera Zygochloa, Spinifex, and Pseudoraphis are placed in the 'bristle clade', confirming that inflorescences of these grasses are homologous with the inflorescences composed of spikelets and sterile branchlets (bristles). Comparison of the nuclear and chloroplast markers identifies several taxa as tetra- or higher polyploids; these are confirmed by southern hybridization. In particular, the Australian species of Paspalidium are allopolyploid, a novel and unexpected result. Zuloagaea bulbosa, a species that lacks the synapomorphic bristles in its inflorescence, is confirmed as a morphologically anomalous member of the clade, and is clearly allopolyploid. This study demonstrates the utility of knotted1 as a phylogenetic marker; we show that it is single copy in diploid taxa and that it exhibits adequate variation to distinguish closely related species. Both nuclear and chloroplast trees show that inflorescence morphology varies considerably in evolutionary time, and that it does not correlate well with phylogenetic relationship.
S1859	C. Ekenäs;B. G. Baldwin;K. Andreasen	2007	A molecular phylogenetic study of Arnica (Asteraceae): Low chloroplast DNA variation and problematic subgeneric classification	Systematic Botany	32	4	917-928				In this molecular study of the mainly North American genus Arnica, sequences from five chloroplast DNA regions (the rpl16 and rps16 introns and the psbA˜trnH, ycf4˜cemA, and trnT˜L spacers), and the nuclear ribosomal internal and external transcribed spacer (ITS and ETS) regions were analyzed using maximum parsimony and Bayesian methods to explore the putatively complicated history of the genus. The chloroplast regions were found to contain minimal variation in Arnica; of 3710 nucleotides only 119 were variable and 45 informative. However, combined with the ribosomal DNA data, the analysis yielded a number of well-supported clades. Strong support for the monophyly of Arnica was found in both the separate and combined analyses but none of the five currently recognized subgenera was resolved as monophyletic in any of the analyses. Arnica (Whitneya) dealbata and A. mallotopus (Mallotopus japonicus), two species that were previously placed outside Arnica, were confidently confirmed as members of the genus. The analyses revealed that A. nevadensis (subg. Austromontana) is most closely related to A. dealbata and that A. mallotopus forms a strongly supported clade with A. unalaschcensis (subg. Andropurpurea). Earlier biogeographical hypotheses that suggested an arctic origin and southward spread of the genus are not supported by our analyses. Hybridization, homoplasy, and rapid evolution are possible explanations for conflicts between the chloroplast and nuclear ribosomal data sets and for low support of the deeper nodes.
S1776	D. Estes;R. L. Small	2007	Phylogenetic relationships of the monotypic genus Amphianthus (Plantaginaceae tribe Gratioleae) inferred from chloroplast DNA sequences	Systematic Botany							Within the past decade, Scrophulariaceae sensu lato has been shown to be polyphyletic and, as a result, is currently undergoing major systematic revision. The traditionally recognized family is now generally considered to comprise several smaller families including the newly expanded Plantaginaceae, a family of 12 tribes, 92 genera, and approximately 2000 species. Recent evidence from molecular phylogenetics supports the inclusion of the tribe Gratioleae within the Plantaginaceae. Gratioleae includes 16ˆ40 genera, depending on generic circumscription, many of which have yet to be assessed phylogenetically. Amphianthus is a monotypic genus whose systematic affinities have long been poorly known. We included Amphianthus, 10 additional Gratioleae genera, and several outgroup genera from Plantaginaceae in a phylogenetic investigation to examine the relationships of Amphianthus. We present the most complete phylogeny of the Gratioleae to date and provide evidence from chloroplast DNA sequences of the ndhF gene and the trnS-trnG-trnG intergenic spacer and intron that unequivocally place Amphianthus within Gratiola, and discuss the morphological evidence supporting our findings. Based on this evidence, we transfer the sole species of Amphianthus (Amphianthus pusillus), to Gratiola, establishing the new name Gratiola amphiantha and placing Amphianthus in synonymy with Gratiola.
S1685	S. D. Fehlberg;T. A. Ranker	2007	Phylogeny and biogeography of Encelia (Asteraceae) in the Sonoran and Peninsular Deserts Based on Multiple DNA Sequences	Systematic Botany							Encelia, Enceliopsis, and Geraea are three closely related genera of shrubs and herbs distributed in the arid lands of western North and South America. Resolution of relationships within Encelia has traditionally been difficult because there is some morphological overlap among species, and species undergo hybridization when sympatric. In this study, we used DNA sequence data from two nuclear regions (ITS and ETS) and two chloroplast regions (psbA-trnH and trnS-trnfM) to infer phylogenetic relationships among 19 species, subspecies, and varieties of Encelia. Eight species of Enceliopsis, Geraea, Simsia, and Bahiopsis were also included as outgroups. These data support previous hypotheses suggesting that Encelia is monophyletic and sister to Enceliopsis + Geraea. In addition, our data provide evidence for two major subclades within Encelia that are supported by morphological synapomorphies. However, little differentiation was observed among species of Encelia within subclades. This lack of differentiation may be the result of a recent diversification of the genus including a recent expansion and radiation in the Peninsular Desert.
S1939	M. A. E. Feist;S. R. Downie	2007	A phylogenetic study of Oxypolis and Ptilimnium (Apiaceae) based on nrDNA ITS sequence data	Systematic Botany							Oxypolis and Ptilimnium are two endemic genera of North America within tribe Oenantheae (Apiaceae subfamily Apioideae). Both genera are small, with 12 species currently recognized. Some members of each genus share an unusual leaf morphology. Rather than having the pinnately compound leaves that generally characterize apioid umbellifers, they have highly reduced, linear, terete, hollow, septate appendages known as rachis leaves. It has long been questioned whether the species with rachis leaves should be placed in separate genera. In this study, we use data from the internal transcribed spacer region of nuclear ribosomal DNA to explore relationships within and between these genera. A total of 147 internal transcribed spacer sequences were obtained from multiple accessions of all species of Oxypolis and Ptilimnium and for several outgroups from tribe Oenantheae. These included Lilaeopsis, which also has rachis leaves, and Cynosciadium and Limnosciadium, which have rachis-like leaves. These sequence data were analyzed using maximum parsimony, maximum likelihood, and Bayesian methods. The results from each of these analyses were congruent and suggest that neither Oxypolis nor Ptilimnium as presently defined is monophyletic. Oxypolis and Ptilimnium are each separated into two clades according to leaf morphology. The rachis-leaved Oxypolis species are provisionally recognized as the genus „Tiedemannia‰ and the rachis-leaved Ptilimnium species are provisionally recognized as the genus „Harperella,‰ pending further investigation. The relationships among these four clades and the genera Cynosciadium, Daucosma, and Limnosciadium are not clear. Nevertheless, it appears that the rachis-leaf habit has evolved multiple times in the tribe. Geographic structure is apparent in the phylogenetic trees and, pending further study, may suggest new taxa; in addition, the presence of O. occidentalis on the Queen Charlotte Islands, well-separated from other populations of this species, suggests that it may have survived the last glaciation in a refugium in this area.
S1628	V. S. Ford;L. D. Gottlieb	2007	Tribal Relationships within Onagraceae inferred from PgiC sequences	Systematic Botany							Phylogenetic relationships among the tribes of Onagraceae were studied using sequences of PgiC, a nuclear gene encoding cytosolic phosphoglucose isomerase. Fragments of 21 genes were examined from plants of 15 species representing 11 of the 17 genera in the family and seven of the eight tribes (the newly proposed Gongylocarpeae was not studied). Maximum likelihood analysis provided a phylogenetic tree with 100% bootstrap support for all but one of the clades that indicate tribal relationships, and corroborated results of recent studies based on chloroplast genes and nuclear ITS sequences. PgiC appears to have a greater rate of divergence than the chloroplast genes and provides much phylogenetically useful data. Two PgiC genes were found in each of the two species sampled in Epilobium; they formed two sister clades, with each species having one gene of each type, showing that the species descended from a single ancestral tetraploid. The two species (E. brachycarpum and E. canum) are not closely related, and previous studies showed that the smallest clade including both contained six of the seven sections of Epilobium. Thus, all species of Epilobium except those in section Epilobium (which was not studied) share a common tetraploid origin, refuting the "Stebbins/Raven" model of the origin of tetraploidy in this genus.
S1767	M. Fougère-Danezan;S. Maumont;A. Bruneau	2007	Relationships among resin-producing Detarieae s. lat. (Leguminosae) as inferred by molecular data	Systematic Botany							The tribe Detarieae s.l. (Caesalpinioideae: Leguminosae) contains a large number of genera that produce resins, but which previously had been placed in different generic groups. To test the monophyly of the resin-producing Detarieae and to examine phylogenetic relationships among these genera we analyzed sequences from the chloroplast trnL intron and trnL-F spacer for more than 80 taxa and from the nuclear ribosomal Internal Transcribed Spacers (ITS) for over 50 taxa. The two chloroplast regions were highly congruent, but incongruent with the nuclear ITS data. Incongruence may be the result of hybridization, particularly in the Colophospermum and Hardwickia polyploid lineage. Resin producing taxa are scattered among two clades, the Prioria and Detarieae s.s. clades, which together are monophyletic, but only with weak support. This group is characterized by the ability to produce bicyclic diterpenes. The phylogenetic relationships as inferred from molecular data resolved the intergeneric affinities but the main clades obtained are different from the groupings proposed by classifications based primarily on morphological characters. Based on these analyses we propose new generic groupings that correspond to the Prioria s.s., Hardwickia, Hymenaea, Eperua s.s. and Detarium clades.
S1717	M. A. García;M. P. Martín	2007	Phylogeny of Cuscuta subgenus Cuscuta (Convolvulaceae) based on nrDNA ITS and chloroplast trnL sequences	Systematic Botany							Within the parasitic genus Cuscuta, three subgenera have been recognized based on characters of the styles and stigmas. Cuscuta subgenus Cuscuta, with free styles and conical to elongated stigmas, is the most diversified in the Old World with about 25 species. We present the first phylogenetic study of the subgenus using nuclear ITS rDNA and chloroplast trnL intron sequences. Sequences of almost all species of the subgenus were obtained and several individuals of particular taxonomic difficulty or wide geographical distribution were sampled. Both maximum parsimony and Bayesian analyses were performed to evaluate the monophyly of the sections previously accepted in Yuncker‚s monograph and to investigate phylogenetic relationships between the species. The monophyly of the subgenus could not be tested with our sampling but using three species of subgenus Monogyna as outgroup, the South African section Pachystigma was sister to the remaining species of subgenus Cuscuta. Section Epistigma plus C. capitata are resolved as monophyletic in all analyses. The distinctive C. babylonica was sister to that clade on the ITS trees but it was not resolved on the trnL trees. Two monophyletic groups within section Cuscuta, first identified here, included the species of tropical African distribution in one case and C. europaea, C. approximata and C. balansae in the other. Factors influencing the taxonomic difficulty of many species in the subgenus include lack of morphological characters, parallelism and gene flow between closely and not so closely related species. Evidence of reticulation events or within species recombination were obtained by both polyphyletic intra-individual ITS sequences and conflicting topologies of the nuclear and plastid trees.
S1798	S. O. Grose;R. G. Olmstead	2007	Evolution of a charismatic neotropical clade: Molecular phylogeny of Tabebuia s.l. Crescentieae and Allied genera (Bignoniaceae)	Systematic Botany							Tabebuia is one of the most commonly encountered genera of Bignoniaceae in the neotropics. Previous research has suggested that this genus may be paraphyletic and contain the tribe Crescentieae. Molecular sequence data of the chloroplast trnL-trnF and ndhF regions were used to reconstruct the phylogeny of Tabebuia, Crescentieae and related genera. A previously unrecognized clade of Neotropical, arboreal Bignoniaceae characterized by palmately compound leaves was identified and is referred to as the Tabebuia alliance. Within this group, Tabebuia is confirmed to be paraphyletic since it includes Crescentieae, Spirotecoma, and Ekmanianthe. The position of Zeyheria, Godmania, and Cybistax with relation to Tabebuia is equivocal. Sparattosperma is sister to the rest of the Tabebuia alliance. Sister to Crescentieae is Spirotecoma. The phylogeny of Tabebuia presented here corresponds to the species groups established by Gentry, while at the same time highlighting the need for taxonomic revisions. When considered on a biogeographic scale, the phylogeny indicates a minimum of four dispersal events from the mainland to the Greater Antilles, and given the unresolved nature of the relationship between Spirotecoma and Crescentieae, raises questions regarding the original range of the latter.
S1832	M. Huang;D. J. Crawford;J. V. Freudenstein;P. D. Cantino	2007	Systematics of Trichostema (Lamiaceae): evidence from ITS, ndhF, and morphology	Systematic Botany							Trichostema (Lamiaceae) is a North American genus comprising five sections and 18 species. Phylogenetic relationships were inferred using DNA sequences (ITS, ndhF) and morphology (63 characters). The monophyly of Trichostema is well supported in four analyses (ITS, ndhF, ITS + ndhF, ITS + ndhF + morphology), but not in the analysis based on morphological data alone. In all analyses, the monophyly of sections Chromocephalum and Trichostema is well supported. The monophyly of section Paniculatum is moderately supported, and there is conflicting evidence regarding the monophyly of section Orthopodium. Although DNA data alone suggest that T. brachiatum is not a member of section Orthopodium, its retention in section Orthopodium is equivocal in the combined DNA-morphology analyses. The submerging of the monotypic section Rhodanthum into Paniculatum by Lewis and Rzedowski is not adopted because the monophyly of this grouping is poorly supported. Biogeographic history and character evolution (life history and chromosome number) are explored in the context of the phylogeny based on the combined ITS and ndhF sequence data.
S1731	R. W. Jobson;M. A. Luckow	2007	Phylogenetic Study of the Genus Piptadenia (Mimosoideae: Leguminosae) using Plastid trnL-F and trnK/matK Sequence Data	Systematic Botany							We undertook a phylogenetic study of the genus Piptadenia with an increased sample of 18 of ca. (Lewis 11) 27 recognized species using DNA sequences from the plastid trnK/matK- and trnL-F regions. Parsimony jackknife results support the hypothesis that Piptadenia is polyphyletic and that there are three independent lineages. The largest group of species forms a monophyletic lineage that is sister to Mimosa and corresponds closely to Piptadenia section Eupiptadenia sensu Barneby. Three species (P. obliqua, P. moniliformis, and P. leucoxylon) of section Pityrocarpa are sister to species of Pseudopiptadenia in a lineage with Parapiptadenia, Microlobius and Stryphnodendron. Piptadenia viridiflora is (Lewis 2) only distantly related to either section Eupiptadenia or Pityrocarpa. Section Eupiptadenia is characterized by the presence of prickles (aculei), a potential synapomorphy linking it to Mimosa, and exserted, racemose or paniculiform inflorescences of aggregated spikes. Piptadenia viridiflora has stipular spines and 1-2 axillary, spicate primary inflorescences. Species of section Pityrocarpa are unarmed trees (sometimes with hardened, persistent stipules) whose flowers have recurved petals and an ovary on a long gynophore. Based on our results, we recommend that Piptadenia viridiflora be recognized as a new genus, and that Piptadenia be restricted to other species of section Eupiptadenia. We resurrect the generic name Pityrocarpa to encompass the Pityrocarpa clade and make the following new combinations: Pityrocarpa moniliformis, Pityrocarpa obliqua ssp. brasiliensis, and Pityrocarpa leucoxylon.
S1816	S. T. Kim;M. J. Donoghue	2007	Molecular phylogeny of Persicaria (Persicarieae, Polygonaceae)	Systematic Botany							Relationships within the Polygonaceae have been recently examined using rbcL sequences, with an emphasis on Polygonum and its segregates. Here we test these results with respect to Polygonum (sensu lato) with an expanded dataset, including additional species and gene regions. Specifically, we focus on inferring the relationships of Eupersicaria (Polygonum sect. Persicaria in many prior treatments), using the chloroplast genes rbcL, trnL-F, trnK intron-matK, and psbA-trnH IGS, and nuclear ribosomal ITS sequences. We conclude that Eupersicaria is monophyletic and most closely related to Tovara and Echinocaulon. In turn, this clade is most closely related to Cephalophilon. The sister group of this entire Persicaria clade contains Bistorta and a clade including Aconogonon and Koenigia, which supports the monophyly of the Persicarieae. Within Eupersicaria there appears to be a deep split between P. amphibia and the remaining species, and there is strong conflict regarding the placement of P. punctata. These results set the stage for a more detailed phylogenetic analysis of Eupersicaria.
S1721	R. E. B. Kirkpatrick	2007	Investigating the monophyly of Pellaea (Pteridaceae) with a phylogenetic analysis of cheilanthoid ferns	Systematic Botany							Cheilanthoid ferns have a worldwide distribution and are found in seasonally dry and rocky habitats. Our inability to decipher natural lineages of cheilanthoids has been attributed to morphological convergence associated with adaptation to xeric environments. The goal of this study was to investigate the monophyly of the genus Pellaea by generating a DNA sequence-based cheilanthoid phylogeny. DNA sequences of the chloroplast rps4 gene and rps4-trnS intergenic spacer (IGS) were used from 105 exemplars, 60 of these were also employed to generate chloroplast trnL-F IGS sequences. Results show that Pellaea sensu Tryon and Tryon is polyphyletic; Pellaea sections Holcochlaena and Ormopteris are distant relatives of sections Pellaea and Platyloma and have closer relationships with Doryopteris. A monophyletic circumscription of "pellaeoid" ferns is here defined to include P. sect. Pellaea, P. sect. Platyloma, Astrolepis, and elements of Paragymnopteris and Paraceterach, all of which form a clade sister to Argyrochosma. The distribution of base chromosome numbers across the cheilanthoid phylogeny reveals potential synapomorphies of x = 29 for the pellaeoid clade and x = 27 for Argyrochosma, and suggests a trend toward reduction in base number during cheilanthoid evolution. Current geographic distribution of cheilanthoid ferns suggests a history of multiple introductions into the Old World from several New World ancestral lineages.
S1930	E. B. Knox;A. M. Muasya;N. Muchhala	2007	The predominantly South American clade of Lobeliaceae	Systematic Botany							A 3.7 kilobase region of chloroplast DNA that includes atpB, rbcL, and their intergenic spacer was sequenced in 61 samples from 45 species of South American Lobeliaceae plus two outgroup samples from Australia. A clade of four hexaploid Lobelia species from Chile is sister to a clade comprising Lysipomia, Siphocampylus, Centropogon, and Burmeistera. Lysipomia is a monophyletic group of small cushion-forming plants endemic to the high Andes, and is sister to the clade comprising the remaining three shrubby genera, which are most diverse in the Andes, but also extend to Central America, Mexico, and the West Indies. Siphocampylus has capsular fruit and is inferred to be paraphyletic relative to fleshy-fruited Centropogon and Burmeistera, but fleshy fruits have evidently evolved repeatedly, making Centropogon polyphyletic. Burmeistera is primarily bat-pollinated and monophyletic, having evolved from one group of species in Centropogon. The phylogenetic relationships within Burmeistera indicate that this genus underwent repeated episodes of rapid diversification when organismal diversification outpaced the accumulation of mutations in this region of chloroplast DNA.
S1846	M. M. Koopman;D. A. Baum	2007	Phylogeny and Biogeography of Tribe Hibisceae (Malvaceae) on Madagascar	Systematic Botany							Madagascar boasts a substantial radiation within Hibisceae (Malvaceae). Molecular data were used to determine the number of migrations to Madagascar, to clarify the timing of these radiations, and to assess the relationships among the endemic taxa. Sequences of matK and ndhF were obtained for representatives of all the Malagasy endemic genera in Hibisceae, as well as representative Malagasy species of Hibiscus and Kosteletzkya. Phylogenetic analysis of these data along with a sampling of outgroups and other major lineages of Hibisceae strongly supported the existence of an exclusively Malagasy clade, the /Megistohibiscus clade, which is sister to the rest of tribe Hibisceae. Humbertiella, Megistostegium, Perrierophytum, all the Malagasy Kosteletzkya, and a number of endemic species usually placed in Hibiscus are members of /Megistohibiscus and appear to be derived from a single introduction to Madagascar in the mid-Miocene. Other sampled Malagasy Hibisceae, including the endemic genera Helicteropsis, Jumelleanthus, and Macrostelia, were resolved as members of the /Euhibiscus clade, implying at least one additional dispersal to the island.
S1761	P. Korall;D. S. Conant;J. S. Metzgar;H. Schneider;K. M. Pryer	2007	A molecular phylogeny of scaly tree ferns (Cyatheaceae)	Systematic Botany							Tree ferns recently were identified as the closest sister group to the most hyperdiverse clade of ferns, the polypods. Although most of the 600 species of tree ferns are arborescent, the group encompasses a wide range of morphological variability, from diminutive members to the giant scaly tree ferns, Cyatheaceae. This well-known family comprises most of the tree fern diversity (~500 species) and is widespread in tropical, subtropical, and south temperate regions of the world. Here we investigate the phylogenetic relationships of scaly tree ferns based on DNA sequence data from five plastid regions (rbcL, rbcL-accD IGS, rbcL-atpB IGS, trnG-trnR, and trnL-trnF). A basal dichotomy resolves Sphaeropteris as sister to all other taxa and scale features support these two clades: Sphaeropteris has conform scales, whereas all other taxa have marginate scales. The marginate-scaled clade consists of a basal trichotomy, with the three groups here termed (1) Cyathea (including Cnemidaria, Hymenophyllopsis, Trichipteris), (2) Alsophila sensu stricto, and (3) Gymnosphaera (previously recognized as a section within Alsophila) + A. capensis. Scaly tree ferns display a wide range of indusial structures, and although the indusium shape is homoplastic it does contain useful phylogenetic information that supports some of the larger clades recognised.
S1824	D. H. Les;S. W. L. Jacobs;N. P. Tippery;L. Chen;M. L. Moody;M. Wilstermann	2007	Systematics of Vallisneria L. (Hydrocharitaceae Juss.)	Systematic Botany							Morphology, species delimitation, and interspecific relationships were evaluated in a phylogenetic context in the aquatic monocotyledon genus Vallisneria using a combination of morphological and molecular (nrITS, rbcL, trnk 5â•˙ intron) data. Contrary to previous studies that recognized few species worldwide, we distinguished 13 species by molecular data, and an additional 2-3 species by morphological differences within groups that were invariant at the molecular level. Two new Vallisneria species (V. australis, V. erecta) are formally described. Other potentially novel species were detected from the cultivated material examined but require further study to elucidate their taxonomic status. Phylogenetic analyses indicated that vittate (caulescent) species (including Maidenia rubra) are not basal, but nested between two groups of rosulate (rosette) species. To preserve Vallisneria as monophyletic, a new combination is made (V. rubra) that accommodates the transfer of M. rubra to Vallisneria. Several taxonomic characters associated with the stigma morphology of pistillate flowers were found to represent suites of features related to pollination. In most cases, these character suites corresponded to a particular arrangement of filaments in the staminate flowers. The precise geographical origin of Vallisneria remains difficult to determine. However we conclusively documented the presence of the European V. spiralis in Texas (United States), which constitutes the first authentic record of this nonindigenous species in North America.
S1723	J. Li;S. Shoup;Z. Chen	2007	Phylogenetic Relationships of Diploid Species of Betula (Betulaceae) Inferred from Nuclear Nitrogen Reductase	Systematic Botany							Frequent occurrence of ancient hybridization and introgression in the evolutionary history of Betula has made it prone to errors to use chloroplast genes to infer interspecific relationships. Single and low copy genes, however, may offer some hope for accurately reconstructing phylogenetic relationships of Betula and inferring the origin of polyploidy species. In this study sequences of the third intron of the nuclear nitrogen reductase (NIA) were used to estimate relationships of known diploid species of Betula. Two types of the NIA gene were observed in Betula that differed considerably. Sequences of the first type were gathered from all sampled species, while those of the second type were obtained from only B. lenta and B. nana and were not included in phylogenetic analyses. Clone sequences of the NIA gene varied little within individual or species. Maximum parsimony and likelihood analyses generated robust phylogenies with similar relationships. Betula alnoides and B. maximowicziana of subgenus Betulaster formed a well supported clade, which is characterized by the racemose arrangement of pistillate inflorescence. Shrubby species (B. nana and B. michauxii) of a traditionally recognized group did not form a clade. Instead, B. nana was most closely related to white-barked species (e.g., B. pendula, B. platyphylla, and B. populifolia) and together they were clustered with B. nigra. In constrast, B. michauxii is closely allied with B. lenta. Our results suggest that subgenera Betulaster and Betula are monophyletic, while subgenera Chamaebetula, Neurobetula, and Betulenta are polyphyletic.
S1880	J. M. Li;Y. Z. Wang	2007	Phylogenetic Reconstruction among Species of Chiritopsis and Chirita sect. Gibbosaccus (Gesneriaceae) based on nrDNA ITS and cpDNA trnL-F Sequences	Systematic Botany	32	4					Sequences from the internal transcribed spacer region of nuclear DNA (ITS) and the trnL-F regions of chloroplast DNA for of fifteen species of Chirita and seven species of Chiritopsis were used to assess phylogenetic relationships between Chiritopsis and Chirita section Gibbosaccus. Parsimony and Bayesian inference (BI) analyses were conducted using separate nuclear and chloroplast data sets, as well as a combined data set. Phylogenetic trees resulting from separate analyses proved highly congruent and the combined analysis of the two data sets produced a well-supported topology of the species and sections examined. Section Gibbosaccus proved paraphyletic and Chiritopsis polyphyletic in all analyses. Our results provide evidence that the species of Chiritopsis are embedded in section Gibbosaccus and were derived at least twice from within section Gibbosaccus. Finally, we reconsider the morphological evolution and adaptation between and within the two genera. The present analyses indicate that nomenclatural changes will be needed to reflect more accurately relationships in the Gibbosaccus-Chiritopsis complex. Only ~10% of the species in Chirita have been sampled and further data are required before any taxonomic changes can be suggested. KEYWORDS: Chirita sect Gibbosaccus, Chiritopsis, Gesneriaceae, ITS, phylogeny, trnL-F.
S1657	J. M. Lu;D. S. Barrington;D. Z. Li	2007	Molecular phylogeny of the polystichoid ferns in Asia based on rbcL sequences	Systematic Botany	32	1					Polystichum has often been treated as a sub-cosmopolitan genus of 180-230 species, i.e., Polystichum s. l., however, several segregate genera, e.g., Cyrtogonellum, Cyrtomidictyum, Cyrtomium, Phanerophlebia, and Sorolepidium, have been recognized in various treatments. Together, these genera constitute the polystichoid ferns. We used a data set of 47 species of the polystichoid ferns and three outgroups, including new rbcL sequences for six species in Asia, to address their phylogeny. Maximum-Parsimony (MP) and Bayesian inference analyses were performed. The polystichoid ferns were resolved to include four major clades, i.e., the tropical American Phanerophlebia clade, the Cyrtomium s.s. clade, the Polystichum s.s. clade, and an eastern Asian clade containing Cyrtomium subser. Balansana, Cyrtogonellum, three sections of Polystichum, and Cyrtomidictyum (the BCPC clade). The Cyrtomium s.s. clade included 15 species of the genus but excluded subser. Balansana. The Polystichum s.s. clade was resolved as being monophyletic with relatively low bootstrap support, as long as Sorolepidium is included in Polystichum. The overall topology retrieved by the Bayesian analysis was similar to that of the MP tree, but generally had higher internal support. Based on the molecular phylogeny, three sections of Polystichum s.l., i.e., sect. Sphaenopolystichum, sect. Haplopolystichum, and sect. Crucifilix, may be more closely related to other members of the BCPC group. The eastern Asian BCPC group shared once-pinnate fronds, except for Polystichum sect. Sphaenopolystichum. Morphologically, once-pinnate leaf dissection and reticulate venation appear to be ancestral in the polystichoid ferns.
S1853	F. Luebert;J. Wen	2007	Phylogenetic Analysis and Evolutionary Diversification of Heliotropium sect. Cochranea (Heliotropiaceae) in the Atacama Desert	Systematic Botany							Heliotropium sect. Cochranea (Heliotropiaceae) consists of 19 species endemic to the coastal Atacama Desert of Chile and Peru. This section has one of the most restricted geographic distributions and is the largest among the South American sections of Heliotropium. We performed a phylogenetic analysis of a total of 92 species using nuclear ribosomal ITS, and chloroplast ndhF, rps16 and trnL-trnF sequences, and estimated the divergence times of major lineages of the group. Our results suggest that Heliotropium sect. Cochranea is monophyletic. There are two main well-supported lineages within the section: one is H. pycnophyllum, which is sister to rest of the species in the section. Within this second lineage, H. filifolium, H. glutinosum, H. krauseanum and a large polytomous group composed of 15 species form a tetratomy. The age estimates using the penalized likelihood method suggests a minimum age of 14.0±2.0 My for section Cochranea, and 4.6±0.9 My for the large polytomous group within it. Heliotropium sect. Cochranea may have originated in the Miocene during the major uplift of the Andes, and then radiated in the Pliocene in the Atacama Desert.
S1843	V. Malécot;D. L. Nickrent	2007	Molecular Phylogenetic Relationships of Olacaceae and Related Santalales	Systematic Botany							As traditionally circumscribed, the family Olacaceae contains a morphologically diverse assemblage of genera that has historically caused much confusion regarding their classification. For example, Olacaceae contain parasites and nonparasites, climbing lianas and trees, and members with dichlamydous and monochlamydous perianths. This family is basalmost in the sandalwood order (Santalales), thus it represents the staging ground for many innovations that evolved in subsequent groups. The present molecular phylogenetic study has obtained DNA sequence data (nuclear SSU rDNA and chloroplast rbcL and matK) for all but two of the 28 genera in this group. Maximum parsimony and Bayesian analyses have resolved seven clades, well-supported by molecular and morphological characters. Root hemiparasitism appears to have first evolved in the clade containing Ximenia whereas clades between that one and the outgroup appear to be entirely autotrophic.
S1897	J. S. Metzgar;J. E. Skog;E. A. Zimmer;K. M. Pryer	2007	The Paraphyly of Osmunda is Confirmed by Phylogenetic Analyses of Seven Plastid Loci	Systematic Botany							To resolve phylogenetic relationships among all genera and subgenera in Osmundaceae we analyzed over 8,500 characters of DNA sequence data from seven plastid loci (atpA, rbcL, rbcL-accD, rbcL-atpB, rps4-trnS, trnG-trnR and trnL-trnF). Our results confirm those from earlier anatomical and single-gene (rbcL) studies that suggested Osmunda s.l. was paraphyletic. Osmunda cinnamomea is sister to the remainder of Osmundaceae (Leptopteris, Todea, and Osmunda s.s.). We support the recognition of a monotypic fourth genus, Osmundastrum, to accommodate these results. We also resolve subgeneric relationships within Osmunda s.s. and find that subg. Claytosmunda is strongly supported as sister to the rest of Osmunda. A stable, well-supported classification for extant Osmundaceae is proposed, along with a key to all genera and subgenera.
S1692	A. J. Moore;L. Bohs	2007	A phylogeny of Balsamorhiza and Wyethia (Asteraceae: Heliantheae) using ITS, ETS, and trnK sequence data	Systematic Botany	32						Balsamorhiza and Wyethia together comprise 24 species native to western North America. All species in the two genera are perennial herbs with large taproots and chromosome base numbers of x = 19. The species of Balsamorhiza have exclusively basal leaves while the species of Wyethia have cauline leaves (in addition to basal leaves in some species). The relationships among the species of Balsamorhiza and Wyethia were examined using sequences from the nuclear internal transcribed spacer and external transcribed spacer regions and the chloroplast 3‚ trnK intron. Twenty-three species of Balsamorhiza and Wyethia and eight outgroups were sampled. The analyses support the monophyly of the Balsamorhiza/Wyethia clade. Wyethia ovata, a species from southern California and northern Baja California, is sister to the other members of the Balsamorhiza/Wyethia clade. Balsamorhiza is strongly supported as monophyletic and is the sister to the rest of Wyethia. The mostly Californian Wyethia section Agnorhiza, which lacks basal leaves, is not monophyletic. The remainder of the Wyethia species, traditionally placed in sections Alarconia and Wyethia, form a clade in the molecular trees and share synapomorphic large basal leaves.
S1706	A. B. Morris;C. D. Bell;J. W. Clayton;W. S. Judd;D. E. Soltis;P. S. Soltis	2007	Phylogeny and divergence time estimation in Illicium with implications for New World biogeography	Systematic Botany							Illiciaceae comprise the single genus, Illicium, and approximately 30 ˆ 40 species distributed in southern and eastern Asia, the southeastern United States, Mexico, and the Greater Antilles. On the basis of perianth morphology, current taxonomic treatments recognize two sections that do not correspond to geographic distributions. A recent phylogenetic study using ITS sequences found strong support for separate Old and New World clades, but did not include all New World species. We elaborate on this previous study by including all known New World species of Illicium, as well as three additional Asian species, using ITS and the plastid loci trnL, the trnL-F spacer, and trnG. We estimated divergence times within Illicium, using penalized likelihood and multiple fossil calibration points. Our results support separate New and Old World clades, and we re-circumscribe current sectional groupings based on these data. The Illicium crown group appears to have arisen during the Cretaceous, with New World extant taxa diversifying as recently as the late Miocene or early Pliocene. These dates are consistent with recent fossil evidence and molecular estimates for minimum ages of the angiosperms, and for timing of diversification events in other ancient groups, such as Nymphaeales and Chloranthaceae.
S1812	O. Morrone;S. S. Denham;S. S. Aliscioni;F. O. Zuloaga	2007	Parodiophyllochloa, A new genus segregated from Panicum (Paniceae, Poaceae) based on morphological and molecular data	Systematic Botany							Taxonomic features of species of Panicum, previously classified in section Cordovensia, subgenus Dichanthelium, of Panicum, are reviewed and compared with those of other taxa in the Paniceae. The new genus Parodiophyllochloa is proposed on the basis of morphological and molecular characters to include six species ranging from Mexico to Argentina. The new combinations: Parodiophyllochloa cordovensis, P. missiona, P. ovulifera, P. pantricha, P. penicillata, and P. rhizogona are propose and the new genus is compared with other genera of the Paniceae.
S1765	A. Mouly;S. G. Razafimandimbison;F. Achille;T. Haevermans;B. Bremer	2007	Phylogenetic placement of Rhopalobrachium fragrans (Rubiaceae): evidence from molecular (rps16 and trnT-F) and morphological data	Systematic Botany							Rhopalobrachium is an endemic New Caledonian genus of Rubiaceae with controversial tribal position, because its protologue was apparently based on two distantly related species, Rhopalobrachium fragrans and Rhopalobrachium congestum. Despite its new circumscription as a monotypic genus (Rhopalobrachium fragrans) the tribal placement of Rhopalobrachium remained unknown. We investigated for Rhopalobrachium fragrans all morphological characters currently used for circumscribing tribes in the subfamily Ixoroideae sensu lato. The species has axillary inflorescences, with valvate flower aestivation, drupaceous fruits with a single pendulous ovule per locule, and 3-pororate pollen grains. We also performed Bayesian and parsimony analyses based on two chloroplast markers, rps16 intron and trnT-F region, to assess the phylogenetic position of Rhopalobrachium within Ixoroideae sensu lato. These analyses produced well-resolved and strongly supported topologies. The results of both the morphological survey and phylogenetic analyses indicated a position of Rhopalobrachium fragrans in the tribe Vanguerieae and a close relationship with the Pacific genus Cyclophyllum.
S1823	S. K. Pell;J. D. Mitchell;P. P. Lowry;A. Randrianasolo;L. E. Urbatsch	2007	Phylogenetic Split of Malagasy and African taxa of Protorhus s.l. and Rhus s.l. (Anacardiaceae) based on cpDNA trnL-trnF and nrDNA ETS and ITS sequence data	Systematic Botany							The close biotic link between Africa and Madagascar has led to many interesting taxonomic and phylogenetic questions. It has been suggested that the African-Madagascan genus Protorhus and the African-Madagascan species of Rhus s.l. are paraphyletic, but definitive evidence has been lacking. We investigated a clade of Anacardiaceae subfamily Anacardioideae in order to clarify evolutionary relationships and taxonomic rankings of the African-Madagascan members of these two genera. Phylogenetic analysis of sequence data from cpDNA trnL-trnF, and nrDNA ETS and ITS provide strong statistical support for the 1) paraphyly of Protorhus; 2) monophyly of Madagascan Protorhus species; 3) paraphyly of Madagascan Rhus. These results support the need for new circumscriptions of African Protorhus and new generic classifications for the Madagascan species of these two genera. Two nomenclatural changes are proposed, recognizing two former Rhus species in Searsia.
S1739	W. S. Poon;P. C. Shaw;M. P. Simmons;P. P. H. But	2007	Cladistic analysis of Rutaceae subfamilies Rutoideae and Toddalioideae supports a "proto-Rutaceae" group	Systematic Botany							Plastid (trnL intron and trnL-F spacer) and nuclear (ITS-1 and ITS-2 rDNA) regions were analyzed to infer the phylogeny and evaluate the classification of Rutaceae subfamilies Rutoideae and Toddalioideae. The inferred phylogeny lends support to merging these two subfamilies established by Engler based on different fruit types. Moreover, Phellodendron, Tetradium, Toddalia and Zanthoxylum were resolved as a clade, supporting the proposal for a Œproto-Rutaceae‚ group. The molecular data also showed that members of Euodia sensu lato should be placed in three different genera: Tetradium, Euodia, and Melicope. The latter two genera are more closely related to Acronychia than they are to Euodia sensu stricto. Discrepancies were found in the positions of Melicope vitiflora and Tetradium daniellii, suggesting further studies are necessary.
S1852	R. A. Ribeiro;M. T. Lavin;J. P. d L. Filho;C. V. M. Filho;F. R. Santos;M. B. Lovato	2007	The genus Machaerium (Leguminosae) is more closely related to Aeschynomene Sect. Ochopodium than to Dalbergia: inferences from combined sequence data	Systematic Botany	32	4					Phylogenetic relationships among the genera Dalbergia, Machaerium, and Aeschynomene were investigated with sequences from both the chloroplast DNA trnL intron and the nuclear ribosomal DNA ITS/5.8S region. A parsimony and Bayesian analysis of individual and combined data resolved a monophyletic Dalbergia that is sister to a clade comprising Aeschynomene sect. Ochopodium and Machaerium. Aeschynomene sect. Aeschynomene is paraphyletic with respect to genera such as Bryaspsis and Soemmeringia, which collectively are sister to the Dalbergia-Macherium-Ochopodium clade. This study identifies the disparate lineages of the genus Aeschynomene and reveals that species with basifixed stipules (i.e., sect. Ochopodium) perhaps should be ranked as a distinct genus. Species of Ochopodium have the general lomented fruit morphology in contrast to the unique indehiscent samara fruits of Machaerium. The findings of this analysis also have some bearing at the infrageneric level. Limited sampling of Dalbergia sects. Triptolemea and Ecastaphyllum resolves them as monophyletic. In contrast, the traditional infrageneric classification of Machaerium does not show much agreement with molecular groups. Additional sampling of Aeschynomene and Machaerium species, other DNA sequences, and morphological data are needed to resolve the exact relationship of sect. Ochopodium to Machaerium, as well as validate the infrageneric classification of Machaerium.
S1794	E. R. Roalson;L. E. Skog;E. A. Zimmer	2007	Untangling Gloxinieae (Gesneriaceae). II. Reconstructing biogeographic patterns and estimating divergence times among New World continental and island land masses	Systematic Botany							The Gloxinieae tribe (Gesneriaceae) are a diverse clade of approximately 19 genera and 215 species. As with many tropical lineages, patterns and timing of diversification are poorly understood. This is a particular difficulty in groups such as the Gesneriaceae that are lacking a fossil record. Here we explore maximum likelihood and Bayesian inference of phylogenetic relationships in the tribe based on nuclear, chloroplast, and morphological data sets, use Fitch parsimony optimization (FPO) and dispersal vicariance (DIVA) analyses to explore biogeographic patterns in the Gesnerioideae, and use penalized likelihood calibrated by geological events in the Caribbean and South America to explore timing of movement of lineages among Caribbean, Central American, and South American land masses. Likelihood and Bayesian analyses increase support of previous hypotheses of relationships using parsimony and provide additional resolution in some parts of the phylogeny. FPO and DIVA analyses suggest that the most likely scenarios for movement among Central America and the Caribbean and South America is either multiple dispersals from South America to the north, or a single dispersal and diversification with subsequent back dispersal to South America. Estimation of the timing of movement of these lineages among these land masses suggests that the GAARLANDIA land bridge likely played a role in dispersal events and the Gloxinieae/Gesnerieae lineage likely arrived in the Central America/Caribbean zone approximately 26 MYA.
S1679	G. Rouhan;F. Rakotondrainibe;R. C. Moran	2007	Elaphoglossum nidusoides (Dryopteridaceae), a new species of fern from Madagascar with an unusual phylogenetic position in the Squamipedia group	Systematic Botany							A fern from Madagascar is described and illustrated as a new species, Elaphoglossum nidusoides. We investigated its phylogenetic relationships within Elaphoglossum based on analyses of three non-coding, plastid loci (trnL-trnF, rps4-trnS, atpB-rbcL) in 30 other species representative of the diversity of sections. Our results show that E. nidusoides belongs to section Squamipedia. This is an unexpected phylogenetic position regarding the morphology of the new species, which exhibits short-creeping rhizomes, phyllopodia, fronds glabrous or nearly so, fronds more than 15 cm long, and lacks the characteristic peg-like aerophores on the rhizome. Nevertheless, its position as sister-taxon to another Malagasy species, E. marojejyense, is supported by the succulent fronds.
S1833	B. Ruhfel;S. Lindsay;C. C. Davis	2007	Phylogenetic Placement of Rheopteris and the Polyphyly of Monogramma (Pteridaceae s.l.): Evidence from rbcL Sequence Data	Systematic Botany							Recent molecular investigations have elucidated the generic and subgeneric relationships of most vittarioid genera (Pteridaceae sensu lato pro parte). However, the phylogenetic placement of Monogramma and Rheopteris remain to be examined. The inclusion of Rheopteris cheesmaniae (the sole representative of the genus) in the vittarioids has been questioned since its description half a century ago, and although the placement of Monogramma within the vittarioids is well supported with non-molecular characters, its relationship to other members of the vittarioid clade is unknown. We present new phylogenetic evidence from plastid rbcL sequence data indicating that Rheopteris is strongly supported as a member of the vittarioid clade, and that Monogramma is polyphyletic. Data from molecular and non-molecular characters suggest that a clade containing Rheopteris and part of Monogramma, i.e., those species sometimes ascribed to the genus Vaginularia, represent the earliest diverging lineage within the vittarioids, and that remaining members of Monogramma are derived from within Haplopteris.
S1937	A. Salino;T. E. Almeida;A. R. Smith;A. Navarro-Gomez;H. P. Kreier;H. Schneider	2007	A new species of Microgramma (Polypodiaceae) from Brazil and recircumscription of the genus based on phylogenetic evidence	Systematic Botany							We describe a new species of Mocrpgramma (M. microsoroides) from Atlantic Forest of Brazil, present a phylogeny of Microgramma, and provide a new generic circumscription. Microgramma comprises ca. 30 species in the Neotropics and perhaps two species in Africa and islands in the Indiean Ocean. Several species are contentious with regard to generic placement, and have been treated within Pleopeltis, Polypodiu, and Solanopteris. From all known species of Microgramma, the new species differs by the sori forming irregular rows between adjacent primary veins. This finding is quite surprising, inasmuch as all other species in the genus have sori in two very stirct rows, one row on each side of the midrib. The monophyly of Microgramma, as newly redefined, is strongly supported in chloroplast DNA-based pylogenetic analyses, using the gens rbcL, rps4, trps-trnS intergenic spacer, and trnLF intergenic spacer on 13 samples from 12 species. The new species is nested within Microgramma as sister to Microgramma megalophylla. Recognition of the relationships of M. microsoroides calles into question certain soral characters traditionally used to define genera of Polypodiaceae as well as genera of ern sin other families. Sorus placement is notoriously variable in some genera, in many different families of Polypodiales
S1734	A. Sanchez;K. A. Kron	2007	Phylogenetics of Polygonaceae emphasizing on the evolution of Eriogonoideae	Systematic Botany							Polygonaceae has long been recognized as a monophyletic family but the circumscription of clades within has been in constant flux. Two groups currently recognized are the subfamilies Eriogonoideae and Polygonoideae. An analysis using three chloroplast regions ˆrbcL, matK and ndhFˆ and an increased taxon sampling of Eriogonoideae does not support this delimitation. A new definition of the subfamilies is proposed: Polygonoideae is restricted to what has been recognized as tribe Persicarieae, Rumiceae, Polygoneae with the addition of Muehlenbeckia, and Eriogonoideae includes Antigonon, Brunnichia, Coccoloba, Ruprechtia, Triplaris, and Eriogonoideae s.s. Using the second intron of the nuclear region LEAFY, relationships among 28 taxa of Eriogonoideae s.s. were explored. The intron showed high levels of variability and was only useful at low taxonomic levels. The genus Eriogonum and Chorizanthe are not monophyletic and some implications for our understanding of the relationships within the clade are discussed.
S1883	H. Schaefer;A. Kocyan;S. S. Renner	2007	Linnaeosicyos (Cucurbitaceae), a new genus for Trichosanthes amara, the sister species to all other Sicyeae	Systematic Botany							The Old World genus Trichosanthes has flowers with strikingly fringed petals, and Linnaeus therefore placed a species from Hispaniola that he only knew from an illustration (showing the fringed petals) in that genus. The species remained hidden from the attention of subsequent workers until acquiring new relevance in the context of molecular-biogeographic work on Cucurbitaceae. Based on molecular data, it is the sister to all Sicyeae, a New World clade of about 125 species in 16 genera. We here place this species in a new genus, Linnaeosicyos, describe and illustrate it based on new collections, and discuss its phylogenetic context using molecular and morphological data. Judging from Dominican amber, elements of the flora of Hispaniola date back at least 30 my, and the occurrence on the island of five endemic species of Cucurbitaceae (Linnaeosicyos amara from Benincaseae, Melothria domingensis from Sicyeae, Sicana fragrans from Cucurbiteae, and the sister species Anacaona sphaerica and Penelopeia suburceolata also from Cucurbiteae) points to its long occupation by Cucurbitaceae.
S1817	H. Schaefer;I. R. H. Telford;S. S. Renner	2007	Austrobryonia (Cucurbitaceae), a New Australian Endemic Genus, is the Closest Living Relative to the Eurasian and Mediterranean Bryonia and Ecballium	Systematic Botany							The Cucurbitaceae genus Austrobryonia, with four species endemic to Australia, is described, illustrated, and placed in a phylogenetic context based on molecular and morphological data. In the Flora of Australia (Telford 1982), all four species were provisionally included in Mukia, but not formally described. Austrobryonia argillicola, A. centralis, A. micrantha, and A. pilbarensis are adapted to arid central regions of Australia; all species are known from several (7-27) localities, and their distributional ranges are allopatric. A phylogenetic analysis of plastid and nuclear DNA sequences that includes all four species in a family-wide context revealed that Austrobryonia is the closest living relative to a Eurasian and Mediterranean clade consisting of Bryonia L. and Ecballium L. An rbcL molecular clock, calibrated with Cucurbitaceae fossils, dates this rare biogeographic disjunction to minimally 42 my ago (with an error of c. ± 25%), while the crown group of Austrobryonia may be about 8 my old.
S1848	S. M. Sede;O. Marrone;L. M. Giussani;F. O. Zuloaga	2007	Phylogenetic Studies in the Paniceae (Poaceae): A Realignment of Section Lorea of Panicum	Systematic Botany							The taxonomic status of Panicum section Lorea has remained as „incertae sedis‰ within Panicum. To resolve its position within the Paniceae and to test the monophyly of this section, phylogenetic analyses based on chloroplast sequence data (ndhF) and morphology were conducted for the Paniceae with particular emphasis on Panicum section Lorea. The results did not support the monophyly of this section. The species of this group were resolved in two clades which are not sister groups and neither of them is closely related to Panicum s.s. As a result, two new genera are proposed and described: Apochloa and Renvoizea, which are restricted to the Guiana highlands and eastern Brazil. New combinations are: Apochloa animara, A. bahiense, A. chnoodes, A. cipoense, A. eligulata, A. euprepes, A. jauana, A. lorea, A. lutzii, A. molinioides, A. poliophylla, A. sipapoense, A. steyermarkii, A. subtiramulosa, A. tijucae, Renvoizea acicularifolia, R. durifolia, R. glaziovii, R. lagostachya, R. marauense, R. restingae, R. sacciolepoides, R. teretifolia, R. trinii and R. vaginiviscosa.
S1810	A. J. Shaw;I. Holz;C. Cox;B. Goffinet	2007	Phylogeny, character evolution, and biogeography of the Gondwanic moss family Hypopterygiaceae (Bryophyta)	Systematic Botany							Phylogenetic relationships among the seven genera of the Hypopterygiaceae, represented by 14 of the 21 species recognized in the family, are reconstructed based variation in nucleotide sequences of six nuclear, mitochondrial, and plastid loci. Monophyly of the Hypopterygiaceae is strongly supported, whereas Cyathophorum and Dendrohypopterygium are unambiguously polyphyletic. Cyathophorum bulbosum and C. adiantum comprise a lineage sister to the remainder of the family. A lineage comprising three monotypic genera (Canalohypopterygium, Catharomnion, and Dendrocyathophorum) and Dendrohypopterygium arbusculum is sister to Lopidium plus a heterogenous clade that includes Dendrohypopterygium filiculaeforme, Hypopterygium, Cyathophorum hookerianum, and C. parvifolium. The later two species are transferred to Hypopterygium as H. hookerianum and H. parvifolium. The Hypopterygiaceae are distinguished from their sister family, the Hookeriaceae, by their anisophylly, and by a border of 2 or more differentiated cells on lateral leaves, although this character also occurs in the Hookeriaceae and has been lost at least twice in the Hypopterygiaceae. Intermediate cells in the axillary hairs arose early in the evolution of the family but are lacking in the two species of Cyathophorum that form a sister group to the remainder of the Hypopterygiaceae.
S1754	L. O. F. Sousa;T. Wendt;G. K. Brown;D. E. Tuthill;T. M. Evans	2007	Monophyly and phylogenetic relationships in Lymania (Bromeliaceae: Bromelioideae) based on morphology and chloroplast DNA sequences	Systematic Botany							A cladistic analysis of Lymania was conducted using data from morphology and sequences from three chloroplast DNA regions (matK coding region and the psbA-trnH and trnL-trnF intergenic spacers) to examine monophyly of the genus and phylogenetic relationships among genera with which Lymania species have been segregate. All nine recognized Lymania species are nearly endemic to southern Bahia state in Brazil. It is the first genus in Bromeliaceae subfamily Bromelioideae to be the subject of a combined morphological and molecular analysis. The genera of Bromelioideae have been particularly difficult to classify and there has been disagreement about their relationships. Morphological data show better resolution than molecular data alone. The partition homogeneity test supported a combined analysis of the two data sets, yielding a single most parsimonious tree. In the combined analysis, monophyly of Lymania is moderately supported, and the genus is closely related to species of Aechmea subg. Lamprococcus and Ortigiesia. The morphological distinctiveness coupled with low molecular divergence indicates relatively recent and rapid speciation within Lymania. This study provides a framework for future study of Bromelioideae genera and highlights areas that need further attention.
S1752	J. A. Tate;J. McDill;M. C. Acosta;A. d V. Ordóñez;E. A. Moscone;B. B. Simpson;A. A. Cocucci	2007	Phylogeny and character evolution in Nierembergia (Solanaceae): molecular, morphological, and cytogenetic evidence	Systematic Botany							Nierembergia (Solanaceae) contains 20 species found primarily in South America, with one species occurring disjunctly in Mexico. A pollination system not found elsewhere in the Solanaceae typifies this genus. In most species, nectaries are absent, but oil-producing elaiophores are present on the corolla limb and these attract oil-collecting bees. Molecular phylogenetic hypotheses based on nuclear ITS and chloroplast rpl16 intron data support the monophyly of Nierembergia, which is sister to a clade composed of Bouchetia plus Hunzikeria. The data reconstruct two clades within the genus: one composed primarily of herbaceous species with broad stigmas and the second containing woody species with crescent-shaped stigmas. Morphological homoplasy is frequent among the species of the herbaceous clade, while the woody clade is morphologically cohesive. New chromosome counts are reported for eight species of Nierembergia (including three varietals) and previous counts are confirmed for six Nierembergia species and for Bouchetia anomala, Leptoglossis linifolia, and Petunia axillaris.
S1788	T. H. Trinder-Smith;H. P. Linder;T. v d Niet;G. A. Verboom;T. L. Nowell	2007	Plastid DNA Sequences Reveal Generic Paraphyly within Diosmeae (Rutoideae, Rutaceae)	Systematic Botany							The Diosmeae are typical members of the Cape flora. Although the species-level taxonomy has recently received much attention, the generic limits have remained uncertain. In this study plastid DNA (psbA-trnH, atpB-rbcL, and rpl16) were sampled from across the morphological spectrum of species and analysed using parsimony and Bayesian inference. The combined results show Diosmeae to be monophyletic and a number of genera to be polyphyletic. These data are mostly incongruent with the morphology data and suggest that, together with broader sampling of molecular data, more careful examination of morphological characters is needed prior to the adjustment of generic circumscriptions. Keywords:, Bayesian inference, Cape clade, generic boundaries, parsimony.
S1697	E. Tripp	2007	Evolutionary relationships within the species-rich genus Ruellia (Acanthaceae)	Systematic Botany							Phylogenetic relationships among species of the large genus Ruellia (Acanthaceae) have never been studied. Ruellia, with approximately 300 species, is geographically widespread and morphologically diverse. Molecular data for 196 specimens from the nuclear ribosomal ITS region and the chloroplast trnG-trnR region were used to test monophyly of the genus against closely related genera in Ruellieae, to reconstruct phylogenetic relationships among species of Ruellia on a global scale, to re-evaluate previous morphology-based classifications, and to examine the utility of morphological characters, especially corolla morphology, for future sectional delimitation. Bayesian and parsimony analyses indicate four genera are evolutionarily allied to Ruellia. Acanthopale is sister to Ruellia s.l. with strong support. Blechum, Eusiphon, and Polylychnis are nested within Ruellia s.l., and species in Eusiphon and Polylychnis are here formally transferred to Ruellia resulting in the new combinations Ruellia geayi and Ruellia fulgens. Ruellia s.l., including Blechum, Eusiphon, and Polylychnis, is monophyletic but only weakly supported by parsimony. Within Ruellia, Old World taxa form a basal grade and New World taxa are monophyletic and nested within the Old World grade. Alternative hypotheses involving non-monophyly of New World Ruellia were significantly less parsimonious and less likely. Within New World Ruellia, many clades are informally recognized, several of which reflect previous taxonomic groupings to some extent. An alternative hypothesis constraining all putatively hummingbird-pollinated taxa to monophyly was strongly rejected suggesting that corolla morphology has undergone convergent evolution and is therefore likely an inappropriate character for sectional delimitation, contrary to previous use.
S1842	C. Tsutsumi;X. C. Zhang;M. Kato	2007	Molecular phylogeny of Davalliaceae and implications for the classification	Systematic Botany							A molecular phylogenetic analysis using the sequences of atpB, rbcL, accD, atpB--rbcL spacer, and rbcL--accD spacer was made for Davalliaceae with a focus on four systematically uncertain and nomenclaturally influential species. The result shows that Davalliaceae comprises six clades. Davallia plumosa is sister to Scyphularia pentaphylla and S. pycnocarpa. Scyphularia triphylla is sister to a clade comprising other Scyphularia, Davallia plumosa, D. solida, and related species, indicating that imparipinnate leaves are derived twice within the clade. Humata heterophylla is sister to the H. polypodioides group, one of two groups of Humata, in which Davallia corniculata is nested. Paradavallodes multidentatum is nested in Araiostegia + Davallodes, which is a polymorphic basal clade. African Davallia chaerophylloides is allied to an Asian and Pacific group comprising D. denticulata and related species.
S1728	R. Vidal-Russell;D. L. Nickrent	2007	A Molecular Phylogeny of the Feathery Mistletoe Misodendrum	Systematic Botany							Misodendrum comprises eight species of aerial hemiparasites endemic to temperate forests of Chile and Argentina that parasitize Nothofagus. This mistletoe is unique in that it has feathery staminodes on its wind dispersed achenes. Previous classifications included two subgenera, Misodendrum (two sections) and Angelopogon (three sections). The present study tested this classification using two chloroplast genes (trnL-F and matK) and 31 morphological characters. Maximum parsimony, likelihood and Bayesian analyses were performed for individual and combined partitions. Results from analyses of the separate partitions differed only in the positions of M. linearifolium and M. quadriflorum; however, the 2-gene tree gave higher support for M. quadriflorum as sister to all other species. Misodendrum brachystachyum and M. oblongifolium form a well supported clade that is sister to one composed of M. punctulatum, M. gayanum and M. angulatum. These phylogenetic relationships generally agree with previous taxonomic classifications. Subgenus Misodendrum, characterized by warty stems and two stamens, here resolves as a polytomy: M. punctulatum, M. gayanum, and M. angulatum. Subgenus Angelopogon, characterized by the plesiomorphies three stamens and foliacious bracts, is paraphyletic given our rooting. Misodendrum brachystachyum and M. oblongifolium (section Archiphyllum) differ morphologically only by the length of their fruiting staminodes.
S1834	W. Wang;Z. D. Chen;Y. Liu;R. Q. Li;J. H. Li	2007	Phylogenetic and Biogeographic Diversification of Berberidaceae in the Northern Hemisphere	Systematic Botany							Sequences of the chloroplast genes matK and rbcL and nuclear ribosomal ITS2 were used for phylogenetic analyses of Berberidaceae. Three major clades were recognized, each corresponding to the chromosome base number, x = 6, 7, and 8/10. Bongardia was sister to the clade containing Achlys and the Podophyllum group, which consists of Diphylleia, Sinopodophyllum, Podophyllum, and Dysosma. The estimated times of divergence of six disjunct genera between Eurasia and North America ranged from 7.5 - 2.3 Ma to 1.0 - 0.7 Ma. The intercontinental disjunct lineages of Berberidaceae may have originated in eastern Asia and then migrated to Europe and North America. However, long-distance dispersal may explain the distribution pattern of Achlys. Desert xerophytes of Berberidaceae in southwestern Asia originated in response to the advent of dry climate at different times; Bongardia diverged from its closest relatives at 46.5 - 3.6 Ma, whereas Leontice differentiated from Gymnospermium at 10.3 - 3.2 Ma.
S1770	T. Yi;A. J. Miller;J. Wen	2007	The phylogenetic relationships of Rhus (Anacardiaceae) based on sequences of nuclear NIA-i3 intron and chloroplast trnC-D suggests reticulate evolution	Systematic Botany							A phylogenetic analysis of Rhus (Anacardiaceae) was conducted using nuclear and chloroplast sequences. The nuclear (NIA-i3) and chloroplast (trnC-trnD) sequence data generated in this study were compared with previously published phylogenies of Rhus based on nuclear ribosomal ITS data and chloroplast trnL-F and ndhF sequences. The NIA-i3 data provided more parsimony-informative characters than ITS; the trnC-trnD data provided the most parsimony-informative characters among three chloroplast markers. All data sets support the monophyly of Rhus. Within Rhus, the nuclear data support the monophyly of subgen. Lobadium and the monophyly of subgen. Rhus. The chloroplast data suggest a paraphyletic subgenus Lobadium with R. microphylla and R. rubifolia of subgen. Lobadium placed within subgen. Rhus. Rhus coriaria and R. michauxii of subgen. Rhus also have discordant positions in the cpDNA and the nuclear trees. Incongruence among nuclear and chloroplast datasets, together with the phylogenetic positions, sympatric distributions, and morphological intermediacy of discordant taxa suggest possible reticulate evolution among members of Rhus. Yet each species with discordant positions (R. coriaria, R. microphylla, R. michauxii and R. rubifolia) has a single allele or different alleles of the same species forming a monophyletic group in the nuclear ITS and NIA-i3 data. This phenomenon may be due to more ancient origin of these species involving reticulate evolution.
S1684	P. Zhou;A. J. Shaw;F. Menzel	2007	Systematics and divergence population genetics in Sphagnum macrophyllum and S. cribrosum (Sphagnaceae)	Systematic Botany							To clarify long-standing disagreements about the taxonomic and phylogenetic status of Sphagnum macrophyllum and S. cribrosum, twenty-five samples of S. macrophyllum and twenty-four of S. cribrosum, including the rare wave-form morphotype, were sampled from ten states of the eastern United States. The data set included intensive sampling from three populations in North Carolina. Three anonymous genomic regions (rapdA, rapdB and rapdF) were sequenced for all the samples; two (nuclear) LEAFY introns (LEAFY1 and LEAFY2) and one chloroplast locus (trnG) were sequenced for all the samples excluding the twenty-two within-population North Carolina samples. The results showed that S. macrophyllum and S. cribrosum are reciprocally monophyletic with maximum parsimony bootstrap support and significant Bayesian posterior probabilities. Genetic analyses based on neutral coalescence models suggest that the simplest allopatric speciation model˜the isolation model with no subsequent gene flow and constant population sizes˜cannot be rejected. Nevertheless, some topological conflicts among loci suggest the possibility of limited interspecific hybridization. This study also showed that the morphologically distinctive wave-form is nested within S. cribrosum and wave-form samples from Singletary Lake make up a clade of nearly identical plants. Interestingly, S. macrophyllum and S. cribrosum are morphologically highly similar but are reciprocally monophyletic and highly differentiated, whereas the unique and morphologically divergent wave-form is genealogically derived from within normal S. cribrosum.
S1618	S. A. Magallón	2007	From fossils to molecules: phylogeny and the core eudicot floral groundplan in Hamamelidoideae (Hamamelidaceae, Saxifragales)	Systematic Botany	32	2	317-347	10.1600/036364407781179617			Most floral diversity in the core eudicots is based on a structural plan that includes among its most distinctive elements a bipartite perianth and pentamerous merosity combined with a bicarpellate gynoecium. To obtain insights about the origin of this groundplan, the evoultion of its structural components in Hamamelidoideae (Hamamelidaceae, Saxifragales, core eudicots) is explored. Phylogenetic hypotheses were obtained from independent analyses of morphological and molecular data, and from two alternative approaches to integrating morphological and molecular data from living and fossil taxa. In spite of being largely incomplete, fossils were unambiguously placed within particular clades in the well resolved trees obtained from morphological data. Phylogenetic analyses of individual and combined molecular data sets using different optimization criteria resulted in congruent trees that share most of their strongly supported nodes. Although morphological and molecular trees depict different relationships, no supported incongruence exists. A total evidence analysis including only complete taxa was congruent with molecular trees but resolution decreased substantially as incomplete taxa and incomplete characters were included. A parsimony analysis of morphological data constrained with the strongly supported nodes from the total evidence tree resulted in the same backbone relationships as the molecular trees and in the unambiguous placement of incomplete taxa, however, relationships within some clades were unique. The floral characters of ancient fossils and their nested placement in the phylogeny indicate morphological stasis since the origin of major lineages of Hamamelidoideae. Individual floral structural elements display independent evolutionary histories, suggesting that the core eudicot floral groundplan evolved through the accretion of structural components which originated at different points during angiosperm history, some outside eudicots, and others, namely the bipartite perianth and the pentamerous merosity, most likely within core eudicots.
S2019	M. E. Barkworth;M. O. Arriaga;J. F. Smith;S. W. L. Jacobs;J. Valdés Reyna;B. S. Bushman	2008	Molecules and morphology in South American Stipeae (Poaceae)	Systematic Botany							We conducted phylogenetic analyses of molecular data (ITS, trnH-psbA, trnC-trnL, and trnK-rps16) from 74 species of stipoid grasses. Of these species, 31 are native to South America, 7 are native to Mexico and/or the southern United States, 54 to the northern North America, 1 to southern and northern North America, 14 to Eurasia or the Mediterranean region, and 6 to Australia. The outgroup was Glyceria declinata, a member of the Meliceae. The purpose of the study was to evaluate alternative generic treatments of the South American Stipeae, all of which are based on morphological and anatomical information. Questions of particular interest were the merits of recognizing Amelichloa and the inclusion of Stipa subgg. Pappostipa and Ptilostipa in Jarava. Trees obtained from separate analyses of the ITS and cpDNA data were poorly resolved. The majority rule tree obtained from the combined data supported the monophyly of Austrostipa, Hesperostipa, Piptochaetium, Stipa subg. Pappostipa, Nassella + Amelichloa, Aciachne + Anatherostipa, and Hesperostipa+ Piptochaetium + Aciachne + Anatherostipa. Duplicate runs with altered taxon order and with models selected using the Aikake information criteria differed only slightly in posterior probability values. The Hesperostipa+ Piptochaetium + Aciachne + Anatherostipa clade is not supported with models selected using the Aikake information criteria for both the ITS and cpDNA data. None of the trees support inclusion of Stipa subg. Pappostipa in Jarava. For subg. Ptilostipa we obtained no ITS data and cpDNA data for only one species. The cpDNA data placed the species in a clade with two Nassella species. Increased taxon sampling and examination of more genes, particularly nuclear genes, is needed to develop a robust phylogeny of the South American members of the Stipeae.
S2221	C. F. Barrett;J. V. Freudenstein	2008	Patterns of morphological and plastid DNA variation in the Corallorhiza striata species complex (Orchidaceae)	Systematic Botany							Corallorhiza striata is a wide-ranging, morphologically variable, mycoheterotrophic orchid complex distributed across North America. Objectives of this study were to assess relationships and test validity of previously delimited varieties of C. striata and the recently described C. bentleyi. Two plastid DNA regions were sequenced for individuals from several populations across North America, identifying four major clades. The large-flowered C. striata var. striata (northern U.S.A., southern Canada) was sister to the smaller-flowered var. vreelandii (southwestern U.S.A., Mexico), and these were sister to a Californian clade with relatively intermediate-sized flowers. C. striata var. involuta (Mexico) and the endangered C. bentleyi (eastern U.S.A.) shared a very close relationship, sister to the remaining C. striata. Principal Components Analysis and Nonparametric Multivariate Analysis of Variance on nine quantitative morphological characters, using plastid DNA clades as independent variables, demonstrated strong correlations. Morphological analyses supported differentiation of both C. striata var. involuta and C. bentleyi relative to all other accessions of C. striata, suggesting their recognition as separate species; these findings will have future implications for conservation. The biogeographic scenario was more complex than previously thought, with members of two major plastid DNA lineages (C. bentleyi/var. involuta and the remaining C. striata) existing in Mexico and U.S.A./ Canada. These findings contribute to a burgeoning body of data on poorly studied plant groups sharing Mexican-northern North American geographic distributions.
S1986	H. L. Bell;J. T. Columbus	2008	Proposal for an expanded Distichlis (Poaceae): evidence from molecular, morphological, and anatomical characters	Systematic Botany							The Distichlis clade comprises Distichlis (7 species), Monanthochloë (2), and Reederochloa (1). We investigated relationships within the clade using chloroplast (trnLˆF and ndhF) and nuclear (ribosomal internal transcribed spacer) sequences, macromorphology, leaf blade cross sections, and lemma micromorphology. The clade is supported as monophyletic, but Distichlis as currently used is not monophyletic in either the chloroplast or the nuclear phylogeny. A significant synapomorphy for the clade is the presence of a single papilla in the center of each subsidiary cell on lemmas. Other diagnostic characters include dioecy, growth in saline/alkaline soils, rhizomes and/or stolons, lemma nerve number of 6 to 13, and bicellular microhairs with basal cells sunken into the epidermis. There is conflict between the nuclear and chloroplast trees in the placement of D. humilis, D. laxiflora, and D. scoparia. Both molecular analyses show Monanthochloë and Reederochloa as being derived from within Distichlis. Their blade lengths, number of spikelets per inflorescence, and number of florets per spikelet also fall within the range for Distichlis. Consequently, we recommend expanding Distichlis to include Monanthochloë and Reederochloa and publish the new combinations needed: Distichlis acerosa, Distichlis eludens, and Distichlis littoralis.
S2226	M. A. Bello;A. Bruneau;F. Forest;J. A. Hawkins	2008	Elusive relationships within order Fabales: phylogenetic analyses using matK and rbcL sequence data	Systematic Botany							The order Fabales, including Leguminosae, Polygalaceae, Quillajaceae and Surianaceae, represents a novel hypothesis emerging from angiosperm molecular phylogenies. Despite good support for the order, molecular studies to date have suggested contradictory, poorly supported interfamilial relationships. Our reappraisal of relationships within Fabales addresses past taxon sampling deficiencies, and employs parsimony and Bayesian approaches using sequences from the plastid regions rbcL (166 spp.) and matK (78 spp.). Five alternative hypotheses for interfamilial relationships within Fabales were recovered. The Shimodaira-Hasegawa test found the likelihood of a resolved topology significantly higher than the one calculated for a polytomy, but did not favour any of the alternative hypotheses of relationship within Fabales. In the light of the morphological evidence available and the comparative behavior of rbcL and matK, the topology recovering Polygalaceae as sister to the rest of the order Fabales with Leguminosae more closely related to Quillajaceae + Surianaceae, is considered the most likely hypothesis of interfamilial relationships of the order. Dating of selected crown clades in the Fabales phylogeny using penalized likelihood, suggests rapid radiation of the Leguminosae, Polygalaceae and (Quillajaceae + Surianaceae) crown clades.
S2070	J. S. Boatwright;M. M. L. Roux;M. Wink;T. Morozova;B. E. v Wyk	2008	Phylogenetic Relationships of the Tribe Crotalarieae (Fabaceae) Inferred from DNA Sequences and Morphology	Systematic Botany							Tribe Crotalarieae is a large and diverse group of papilionoid legumes that largely occur in Africa. A systematic study of generic relationships within the tribe was undertaken using nucleotide sequences from the internal transcribed spacer (ITS) of nuclear ribosomal DNA, the plastid gene rbcL, and morphological data. The Crotalarieae are strongly supported to be monophyletic and sister to the tribe Genisteae. Lebeckia, Lotononis, and Wiborgia are all paraphyletic in the molecular analyses and morphological data support the division of Lebeckia into three more natural genera (one of which includes the monotypic North African Spartidium). Four major lineages were identified within the tribe based on sequence data: the „Cape‰ group, comprising Aspalathus, Lebeckia, Rafnia, Spartidium, and Wiborgia; the Lotononis group, comprising Lotononis pro parte, Pearsonia, Robynsiophyton, and Rothia; a group comprising Lotononis section Leptis, L. section Listia, and allies; and the Crotalaria group, comprising Bolusia, Crotalaria, and Lotononis hirsuta (Lotononis section Euchlora). Morphological analysis yields a similar topology, except that Lotononis is monophyletic if L. hirsuta were excluded. When the molecular and morphological data sets are combined, the same major clades are retrieved as in the molecular analysis, with the notable exception that Lotononis and Lebeckia senso stricto are supported as monophyletic. The results from this study have important implications for the classification of the tribe Crotalarieae and present an important step towards a natural and phylogenetic generic classification for the tribe.
S2151	G. K. Brown;D. J. Murphy;J. T. Miller;P. Y. Ladiges	2008	Acacia s.s. and its relationship among tropical legumes, tribe Ingeae (Leguminosae: Mimosoideae)	Systematic Botany	33	4					To search for the sister taxon of Acacia s.s. (tribe Acacieae) and to further knowledge of the phylogeny of the related tribe Ingeae, we have sequenced two regions of nuclear ribosomal DNA (ITS and ETS). Sixty species from the tribe Ingeae (26 genera), together with representatives from each of five lineages of tribe Acacieae, have been sampled. Ingeae and Acacia s.s. form a well supported clade, with a monophyletic Acacia s.s. nested within a paraphyletic Ingeae. Based on limited sampling, the closest relative of Acacia s.s. is most likely one of the Australian species of the genus Paraserianthes: Paras. lophantha subsp. lophantha or Paras. toona. Related to Acacia s.s. and Paraserianthes is a group of Ingeae taxa from Australia and South East Asia: Archidendron p.p., Archidendropsis, Pararchidendron and Wallaceodendron. This study is a preliminary step in resolving the inter-generic relationships of the tribe Ingeae. Genetic relationships within the Ingeae appear to conform to morphological groups previously identified as genera and informal alliances; some notable exceptions are discussed.
S2126	M. Costea;S. Stefanovic	2008	Phylogeny of Cuscuta californica complex (dodders, Convolvulaceae) with a description of a new species	Systematic Botany							Abstract not yet available. To be updated once the paper is submitted.
S2023	Y. Endo;B. H. Choi;H. Ohashi;A. Delgado-Salinas	2008	Phylogenetic Relationships of New World Vicia (Leguminosae) Inferred from nrDNA Internal Transcribed Spacer Sequences and Floral Characters	Systematic Botany	33	2					The New World species (ca. 27 spp.) of Vicia (tribe Fabeae, family Leguminosae) were classified into four stylar type groups as follows: (1) a laterally compressed and evenly hairy stylar type (Le-type) group, (2) a dorsiventrally compressed and abaxially tufted hairy stylar type (Dabt-type) group, (3) a dorsiventrally compressed and evenly hairy stylar type (De-type) group, and (4) V. leucophaeawhich is characterized by its arcuate style with a dense ring of stylar hairs at a considerable distance from the stigma. In the present study, the stylar distinctions among the groups were confirmed by morphological and anatomical studies on the stylar characters of representative species of the groups. Then, the phylogenetic positions of these groups were assessed using molecular phylogenetic analysis based on sequences from the nuclear ribosomal DNA (nrDNA) internal transcribed spacer (ITS) region of the representative species. Consequently, the New World Le-type stylar group was revealed to be a sister group to the Old World Le-type stylar group. The New World Dabt-type stylar group and V. leucophaea were nesting with the Old World Dabt-type stylar group. These New World groups branched off from the other clades of the Old World species at relatively apical part of the present molecular phylogenetic tree. These findings were nested well within the Old World Vicia suggestinged that the New World Vicia species diversificationed occurred relatively recently during the diversification evolution of Vicia.
S2232	B. Frajman;G. M. Schneeweiss	2008	A campanulaceous fate: the Albanian stenoendemic Asyneuma comosiforme in fact belongs to isophyllous Campanula	Systematic Botany							The Balkan Peninsula is one of the few biodiversity hotspots in Europe, characterized by numerous endemic taxa. Due to their often-restricted distribution and the scarcity of modern phylogenetic and phylogeographic studies from this region, the phylogenetic position and taxonomy of these species are often poorly understood. One example is Asyneuma comosiforme, a stenoendemic species known only from the Shija Gorge in northeastern Albania. Since its description in 1921, the position of this poorly known species within Asyneuma has been questioned. Here, we use nuclear ITS and plastid trnL-trnF DNA sequence data to address the question of the phylogenetic position of this enigmatic species. The inferred phylogenies clearly support A. comosiforme as sister to the main clade of isophyllous Campanula species, which is supported by morphological and ecological similarities. Thus, a new nomenclatural combination, Campanula comosiformis, is proposed. Given the restricted distribution, this species should be considered at least vulnerable, but the small population size might warrant its classification as endangered.
S1959	E. A. Friar;L. M. Prince;J. M. Cruse-Sanders;M. E. McGlaughlin;C. A. Butterworth;B. G. Baldwin	2008	Hybrid Origin and Genomic Mosaicism of Dubautia scabra (Hawaiian Silversword Alliance; Asteraceae--Madiinae)	Systematic Botany							Incongruence among different estimates of species relationships in plants, from different molecules, cytogenetic data, biogeographic data, morphological/anatomical data or other sources, has been used frequently as an indication of introgression, hybrid species origin, or chloroplast (cp) capture. In plants, these incongruences are most often seen between data derived from the nuclear vs. the cp genomes and the nuclear markers used for comparison usually have been from the nuclear ribosomal (nr) internal transcribed spacer region (ITS). The amount of genomic material shared between introgressing species can be highly variable. In some of these cases, other nuclear genomic regions have moved between species without leaving a signature on the nrITS. An example of well-supported phylogenetic incongruence is the placement of Dubautia scabra (DC.) D. D. Keck in the Hawai‚ian silversword alliance (HSA); evolutionary hypotheses for D. scabra based on molecular as opposed to cytogenetic data are strongly discordant. In this paper, we test these two conflicting phylogenetic hypotheses regarding the evolutionary relationships of Dubautia scabra using evidence from six low-copy nuclear genes, as well as multiple chloroplast noncoding regions and nrITS. The nrITS region is also examined for the presence of multiple copy types. Incongruence between inferred relationships based on nuclear chromosomal arrangements and molecular phylogenetic data from chloroplast DNA and nrITS is resolved in favor of a hypothesis of ancient hybridization rather than cytogenetic homoplasy. Most single-copy nuclear genes track histories of D. scabra compatible with cytogenetic data whereas chloroplast and nrITS data track a common, different history that appears to reflect hybridization with a chromosomally distinct lineage that also occurs on Maui Nui and HawaiŒi (the Big Island).
S2127	L. M. Giussani;F. O. Zuloaga;C. L. Quarín;J. H. Cota-Sánchez;K. Ubayasena;O. Morrone	2008	Phylogenetic Relationships in the Genus Paspalum (Poaceae: Panicoideae: Paniceae): An Assessment of the Quadrifaria and Virgata Informal Groups	Systematic Botany							Paspalum, an American genus of the x = 10 Paniceae clade, includes about 330 species, four subgenera, and 27 informal groups. Within the genus, the Quadrifaria and Virgata groups are well-represented in South and Central America. Interspecific variability make the delimitation of these groups difficult; hence several species have been included or excluded from Quadrifaria or Virgata depending on the taxonomic treatment. In previous analyses, the Quadrifaria and Virgata groups of Paspalum are polyphyletic. Here we present a new appraisal of the classification of both groups based on the phylogenetic analyses of DNA data from the chloroplast: the rpl16 intron, and the region comprising the trnL and trnF genes. A monophyletic Virgata clade is recovered, consisting of nearly all the species listed in an unpublished manuscript. The Quadrifaria group is restricted to P. quadrifarium and P. quarinii. Other clades grouped species traditionally treated within Virgata or Quadrifaria, although their phylogenetic placement need to be reevaluated. Within most of clades, diploid and polyploid species seemingly derive from a common ancestor denoting an autopolyploid origin. Alloploidy is also possible although reticulate evolution needs to be explored. The wide distribution of the I genome suggests that this is a plesiomorphic state in Paspalum.
S1955	P. Goldblatt;A. Rodriguez;M. P. Powell;T. J. Davies;J. C. Manning;M. V. D. Bank;V. Savolainen	2008	Iridaceae 'Out of Australasia'? Phylogeny, biogeography, and divergence time based on plastid DNA sequences	Systematic Botany							The current infrafamilial taxonomy of the Iridaceae recognizes four subfamilies; Isophysidoideae (1genus: 1 species); Nivenioideae (6: 86), Iridoideae (30: 800), and Crocoideae (28: 990). Phylogenetic analyses of plastid DNA sequences confirm most aspects of this classification and the evolutionary patterns that it implies, importantly the ancestral position of Isophysidoideae and the monophyly of Iridoideae. Subfamily Crocoideae is, however, paraphyletic: it is consistently found to be nested in Nivenioideae, and sister clade to the core Nivenioideae, the woody Klattia, Nivenia, and Witsenia. This clade is sister to Aristea, in turn is sister the Madagascan Geosiris, which is sister to the Australasian Patersonia. We treat Aristea, Geosiris, and Patersonia as separate subfamilies, Aristeoideae, Geosiridaceae, and Patersonioideae, rendering Nivenioideae and Crocoideae monophyletic. The alternative, uniting a widely circumscribed Nivenioideae and Crocoideae seems undesirable because Nivenioideae have none of the numerous synapomorphies of Crocoideae, and that subfamily includes more than half the total species of Iridaceae. Main synapomorphies of Crocoideae are: pollen operculate; exine perforate; ovule campylotropous; root xylem vessels with simple perforations; rootstock a corm; inflorescence usually a spike; plants deciduous. Four more derived features of Crocoideae are shared only with core Nivenioideae: flowers long-lived; perianth tube well developed; flowers sessile; and septal nectaries present. The genera of the latter subfamily are evergreen shrubs, have monocot-type secondary growth, tangentially flattened seeds, and the inflorescence unit a binate rhipidium. The latter feature unites core Nivenioideae with Aristea, Geosiris, and Patersonia, which have fugaceous flowers and, with few exceptions, a blue perianth. Molecular-based phylogenetic trees using sequences from six plastid DNA regions now show discrete generic clusters within Crocoideae and Iridoideae, the foundation for the tribal classification. The five tribe classification of Iridoideae, initially based on morphological characters and subsequently supported by a four plastid DNA region sequence analysis, continues to receive support using additional DNA sequences.
S2004	D. González;A. P. Vovides;C. Bárcenas	2008	Phylogenetic relationships of the Neotropical genus Dioon (Cycadales, Zamiaceae) based on nuclear and chloroplast DNA sequence data	Systematic Botany	33						Previous hypotheses of relationships within Dioon Lindl., indicated the presence of two large clades within the genus. However, relationships among species still remained unresolved. In this study, molecular phylogenetic analyses were performed with individual and combined data sets from the ITS region of the ribosomal DNA and the trnL-F of the chloroplast DNA. To explore whether indels were a source of phylogenetically informative characters, indels were analyzed by excluding them from the analyses (Coding A); including them as ambiguous data (Coding B); as multistate (Coding C) and as binary characters (Coding D). We found that the rate of mutation in the ITS region is appropriate to solve most relationships at the species level. This is in contrast with the trnL-F, which showed little variation. Our results show that most clades obtained during analyses correspond with previously recognized species within Dioon. This phylogeny groups the genus into two main clades that show clear biogeographic relationships between the species occurring along the Pacific Sierra Madre Occidental and the Atlantic Sierra Madre Oriental.
S2118	N. P. Havill;C. S. Campbell;T. F. Vining;B. LePage;R. J. Bayer;M. J. Donoghue	2008	Phylogeny and biogeography of Tsuga (Pinaceae) inferred from nuclear ribosomal ITS and chloroplast DNA sequence data	Systematic Botany							Hemlock, Tsuga (Pinaceae), has a disjunct distribution in North America and Asia. To examine the biogeographic history of Tsuga, phylogenetic relationships among multiple accessions of all nine species were inferred using chloroplast DNA sequences and multiple cloned sequences of the nuclear ribosomal ITS region. Analysis of chloroplast and ITS sequences resolve a clade that includes the two western North American species, T. heterophylla and T. mertensiana, and a clade of Asian species within which one of the eastern North American species, T. caroliniana, is nested. The other eastern North American species, T. canadensis, is sister to the Asian clade. Tsuga chinensis from Taiwan did not group with T. chinensis from mainland China, and T. sieboldii from Ullung Island did not group with T. sieboldii from Japan suggesting that the taxonomic status of these distinct populations should be reevaluated. The Himalayan species, T. dumosa, was in conflicting positions in the chloroplast and ITS trees, suggesting that it may be of hybrid origin. Likelihood-based biogeographic inference with divergence time estimates infers an Eocene basal crown group diversification and an initial widespread circumpolar distribution with subsequent vicariance and extinction events leading to the current disjunct distribution.
S2146	S. B. Hoot;H. Zautke;D. J. Harris;P. R. Crane;S. S. Neves	2008	Phylogenetic Patterns in Menispermaceae Based on Multiple Chloroplast Sequence Data	Systematic Botany							Menispermaceae, a dioecious, largely pantropical family of vines and lianas, consists of approximately 70 genera. In this paper, we present phylogenies (derived using maximum parsimony, maximum likelihood, and Bayesian inference) based on chloroplast atpB and rbcL sequence data for 41 42 genera and numerous outgroup taxa representing all families in the Ranunculales. Results of this work confirm that a clade consisting of Berberidaceae and Ranunculaceae is sister to the Menispermaceae and that Menispermaceae is highly supported as monophyletic. Within Menispermaceae, Menispermum and Sinomenium, two genera with distributions in the Northern Hemisphere, are weakly to moderately supported as sister to all remaining Menispermaceae. Many of the tribes as described by previous workers are not monophyletic. To expand both the data and sampling, we combined our atpB and rbcL data with previously published ndhF data for two additional analyses: 1) for all matching taxa (4546 taxa) and 2) for all genera available whether matching or not (22% missing data, 7778 accessions). All trees produced from our three analyses were highly congruent, especially where branch support was high. Four major clades were recovered from all analyses and are informally named. Superimposing our geographical distributions on our atpB/rbcL phylogeny indicates that many well supported clades have distributions on multiple continents, probably due to both vicariance and dispersal. Several previous hypotheses regarding trends in character evolution are tested; our phylogenies suggest that the following are all derived character states within the family: arborescent habit; acrodromous, peltate, compound, or lobed leaves; absence of condyle and endosperm; smooth endosperm; fused stamens; and tricolpate pollen.
S2188	M. A. Jaramillo;R. Callejas;C. Davidson;J. F. Smith;A. C. Stevens;E. J. Tepe	2008	A phylogeny of the tropical genus Piper using ITS and the chloroplast intron psbJ-petA	Systematic Botany							Piper is one of the largest genera of flowering plants. The uniformity of its small flowers and the vast number of species in the genus has hindered the development of a stable infrageneric classification. We sampled 575 accessions corresponding to 332 species of Piper for the ITS region and 181 accessions for the psbJ-petA chloroplast intron to further test previous hypotheses about the major clades within Piper. Phylogenetic analyses were performed for each marker separately and in combination. The ITS region alone resolves eleven major clades within Piper, whereas the psbJ-petA intron fails to recover four of these major groupings and provides no resolution at the base of the phylogeny. The combined analysis provides support for ten monophyletic groups and offers the best hypothesis for relationships in Piper. Our massive ITS dataset allows us to assign confidently a large number of species in this "giant" genus to a major clade. Piper is here divided into ten major clades for which we provide a morphological description. Various clades and subclades are newly identified here: Peltobryon, Schilleria, Isophyllon, P. cinereum/P. sanctum. The clades described here provide a solid framework for future, and more focused, evolutionary studies.
S1982	J. Jiang;J. Li;C. Fu;M. Li;X. Lou	2008	Phylogenetics and biogeography of Wisteria (Fabaceae) inferred from sequences of chloroplast and nuclear DNA regions	Systematic Botany							Previous molecular phylogenetic studies of Fabaceae indicated that species of Wisteria, an intercontinental disjunct genus between eastern Asia and eastern North America, form a clade derived from within Callerya. However, interspecific relationships were not well resolved or supported. In this study, we employed sequences of nrDNA ITS and chloroplast gene matK and intergenic spacer psbA-trnH to examine interspecific relationships and infer the character evolution and biogeographic history of Wisteria. Our results show that North American species of Wisteria form a sister relationship with the eastern Asian species. In the Asian clade, Wisteria brachybotrys of Japan is sister to the clade containing W. floribunda of Japan and Korea, and W. sinensis, W. villosa, and W. brevidentata of China. Sequences vary little among the three Chinese species and there is no well-supported phylogenetic structure, recognizing them as a single species. Our Fitch parsimony analysis suggests that Wisteria sinensis of the continental Asia may have derived from ancestral populations from Japan via Korean Peninsula. Both clockwise twining in W. floribunda and erose leaf margin in W. sinensis are more derived features within Wisteria.
S2115	M. G. King;E. H. Roalson	2008	Exploring evolutionary dynamics of nrDNA in Carex subgenus Vignea (Cyperaceae)	Systematic Botany							Nuclear ribosomal DNA (nrDNA) has been used for more than a decade in species level phylogenetic analyses. While this marker can often be a powerful phylogenetic marker, intra-individual polymorphisms of the internal and external transcribed spacers (ITS, ETS) can lead to problems in their use for phylogeny reconstruction. Incomplete concerted evolution coupled with hybridization and incomplete lineage sorting can further exacerbate these problems. Previous phylogenetic analyses using nrDNA of Carex subgenus Vignea suggest that the current sectional classifications maybe artificial. We endeavored to identify whether those issues of sectional limits were due to poor classification, or whether the issues of polyphyletic sections were an artifact of using ITS and ETS for phylogenetic studies within Vignea. Through comprehensive cloning we identified severe intra-individual polymorphisms and in many cases this led to the polyphyly of individuals. Furthermore, individuals identified with mutations in the 5.8S ribosomal subunit did not show a significant deviation in G-C percentage and free energy. Based on these results we suggest that nrDNA has undergone a complex evolutionary history within Carex subgenus Vignea. We also suggest that the use of nrDNA markers be abandoned in species level phylogenetic reconstructions in Vignea.
S2021	A. Krings;D. T. Thomas;Q. Y. Xiang	2008	On the generic circumscription of Gonolobus (Apocynaceae, Asclepiadoideae): Evidence from molecules and morphology	Systematic Botany	33	2					Gonolobus (Apocynaceae, Asclepiadoideae) is a New World genus comprising an estimated 100ˆ150 species. The degree of variation in estimated species numbers is largely the result of still poorly known tropical taxa and differences regarding generic limits. Characters historically used to delimit genera such as Gonolobus within Gonolobinae˜such as laminar dorsal anther appendages and various follicle morphologies˜have been controversial and their evolution remains unknown, not having been explored in a phylogenetic framework. The primary objectives of the current study were to (1) test the monophyly of Gonolobus sensu Woodson in the context of a phylogeny of New World Asclepiadeae and (2) explore the evolution of laminar dorsal anther appendages and winged follicles with respect to their potential utility in generic circumscription. Chloroplast (trnL-F, rps16) data are newly presented for sixty-three taxa of Gonolobinae, representing an increased sampling of the subtribe from a maximum of seven taxa in prior studies. These data were combined with a previously published dataset to form a 183 taxa matrix of New World Asclepiadeae. Nuclear (LEAFY) data were newly generated for forty-nine taxa of Gonolobinae. Evidence from parsimony and Bayesian analyses of chloroplast and nuclear data presented here supports the monophyly of both the subtribe and the genus Gonolobus in a narrow or broad sense. Laminar dorsal anther appendages are restricted to Gonolobus s.l. or s.s., although parsimony remains equivocal on whether they evolved once or twice. A transversion in the trnL-F spacer is shown synapomorphic for Gonolobus s.s. Two indels in LEAFY, as well as winged follicles, are shown synapomorphic for Gonolobus s.l.
S2156	M. Lehnert;M. Kessler;A. N. Schmidt-Lebuhn;S. A. Klimas;S. D. Fehlberg;T. A. Ranker	2008	Phylogeny of the fern genus Melpomene (Polypodiaceae) inferred from morphology and chloroplast DNA analysis	Systematic Botany							Guided by systematic studies on Melpomene, we tested the monophyly of the genus by analyzing sequences of cpDNA (atp&#946;, rbcL) and morphological characters of 23 of the 27 recognized species. The atp&#946; data did not yield any resolution of the investigated group. The other data sets each supported the monophyly of the genus, as did all data combined, and indicate it to be sister to the Lellingeria apiculata group as proposed in previous studies. While the morphologically distinct M. leptostoma (Fée) R. C. Moran & A. R. Sm. and M. gracilis (Hook.) A. R. Sm. are basal lineages with long branch lengths, most of the relationships within the core genus are weakly supported and have very short branch lengths. This indicates a recent radiation of the genus in the northern Andes, its center of diversity, apparently under the influence of the fast uplift of the mountain range and of glacial fluctuations of the vegetations zones, with subsequent dispersals to the Guyana Highlands, the Brazilian shield, and Africa.
S2131	M. Li;J. Li;J. Jiang;C. Fu;W. Judd	2008	Phylogenetics and biogeography of Pieris (Lyonieae, Ericaceae) inferred from sequences of nuclear and chloroplast genomes	Systematic Botany							Pieris is an eastern Asian (EA)-eastern North American (NA) disjunct genus with P. cubensis in the West Indies (WI). In this study, we inferred interspecific relationships within the genus using nucleotide sequences of nuclear (nrDNA ITS and ETS) and chloroplast (matK, trnL-F, and psbA-trnH) markers. Pieris nana is sister to the clade comprising the rest species of Pieris, i.e., Pieris subg. Pieris. The species of subg. Pieris diverge consecutively in the order of Pieris cubensis, P. swinhoei, P. floribunda, P. phillyreifolia, and P. formosa plus P. japonica. Neither section Phillyreoides nor section Pieris is monophyletic, and P. phillyreifolia of NA is more closely related to EA species (P. formosa and P. japonica) than to the other NA species (P. floribunda). Morphological characters (such as inflorescence position, testa cell shape, and placenta attachment) used to define the sections are homoplasious, having evolved more than once in Pieris. Dispersal and vicariance analyses suggest that ancestral populations of Pieris were widespread in EA+NA+WI, and two dispersal events may have occurred from the New World to the Old World. Pieris cubensis may have originated as the result of a dispersal event from NA+EA during the early diversification of Pieris in the late Eocene.
S2099	K. G. Mathews;N. Dunne;E. York;L. Struwe	2008	A phylogenetic analysis and taxonomic revision of Bartonia (Gentianaceae-Gentianeae) based on molecular and morphological evidence	Systematic Botany							A phylogenetic study and taxonomic revision of the four currently accepted species of Bartonia (Gentianaceae, tribe Gentianeae, subtribe Swertiinae) were conducted in order to test species boundaries and interspecific relationships. Species boundaries were examined based on measurements of key quantitative and qualitative morphological characters as given in the original descriptions. Phylogenetic analyses were performed using molecular data from the nuclear internal transcribed spacer region (ITS) and chloroplast DNA (trnL intron through the trnL-F spacer), separately and combined using parsimony and Bayesian methodologies, incorporating outgroups from subtribes Swertiinae and Gentianinae. The morphological study revealed that characters of one species, B. texana, represent a subset of the morphological variation found within B. paniculata but that B. paniculata, B. verna and B. virginica could all be separated from one another. The molecular phylogenetic analyses all found B. texana to nest in a clade with the two recognized subspecies of B. paniculata (subsp. paniculata and subsp. iodandra), making the latter paraphyletic. Because of the morphological and molecular findings in this study, Bartonia texana is here reduced to subspecific rank, as Bartonia paniculata subsp. texana. In addition, the molecular phylogenetic analyses showed strong support for a sister group relationship between B. verna and B. virginica, as opposed to between B. paniculata and B. virginica as has been previously suggested.
S2090	J. R. McDill;M. Repplinger;B. B. Simpson;J. W. Kadereit	2008	The Phylogeny of Linum and Linaceae subfamily Linoideae, with Implications for Their Systematics, Biogeography, and the Evolution of Heterostyly	Systematic Botany							Linum, best known because of L. usitatissimum, the source of cultivated flax and linseed oil, is the largest genus of Linaceae subf. Linoideae. Despite its commercial importance, the genus and the other seven genera in the subfamily have not been studied from a phylogenetic perspective. Likewise, the biogeographical history of this widely distributed temperate group remains conjectural. Numerous species in the family display heterostyly but the ancestral state for the group has never been determined. Here, using data from rbcL, three other chloroplast markers, and ITS with a sample of 48 taxa plus Hugonia (subf. Hugonioideae) as outgroup, we show that Linaceae and Linoideae are monophyletic. Within Linoideae, Anisadenia, Reinwardtia, and Tirpitzia are ambiguously placed as sister to the remaining five genera. This latter group consistently forms a blue-flowered (Linum sections Linum and Dasylinum) and a yellow-flowered clade (Linum sect. Linopsis, sect. Syllinum, and sect. Cathartolinum, plus the segregate genera Cliococca, Hesperolinon, Radiola, and Sclerolinon). Diversification of Linoideae appears to have begun 64-71 mya, probably in Southeast Asia. We conclude Linum arose in Eurasia from which it spread to Africa, North America, and South America. Dispersal into the New World could have been via Bering or North Atlantic land bridges, with long-distance dispersal also a possibility. Our data suggest heterostyly may be the ancestral condition in Linoideae, or even Linaceae, with repeated losses and potential regains in different lineages, although multiple independent gains of heterostyly from homostylous ancestry can not be ruled out.
S2026	A. Molina;C. Acedo;F. Llamas	2008	Taxonomy and new taxa in Eurasian Carex (Section Phaestoglochin, Cyperaceae)	Systematic Botany	33	2	237-250				Carex divulsa aggregate, belonging to Carex muricata group in the section Phaestoglochin (Cyperaceae) was studied by 60 macro-and micromorphological characters in a wider geographical range than has been attempted previously, and the status or identity of several taxa commonly associated to this aggregate are examined. Results of numerical analysis support the recognition of six new species within Carex divulsa aggregate, which are also in accordance with by their geographic circumscription. C. cypricus is endemic to Cyprus, C. enokii from the Mediterranean Bassin, C. magacis from Spain and France mountains, C. nordica from Northern Europe, and C. egorovae and C. otomana from East Europe to Central Asia. The morphological data were coded and used in a phylogenetic analysis to discover the relationships among taxa. A key to all taxa belonging to the aggregate is included. Diagnostic characters, illustrations, and detailed descriptions of all the species are given. Notes are also presented on the habitat, distribution, phenology, etimology, and conservation status of each taxa.
S2180	J. E. Molina;L. Struwe	2008	Utility of secondary structure in phylogenetic reconstructions using nrDNA ITS sequences - an example from Potalieae (Gentianaceae: Asteridae)	Systematic Botany							The gentians (Gentianaceae, Asteridae) form a morphologically and ecologically diverse group of plants with interesting phytochemical and medicinal properties. The family contains six tribes, but phylogenetic relationships among the three more derived tribes (Gentianeae, Helieae, and Potalieae) are considered ambiguous. In an attempt to resolve alignment ambiguity and provide better scientific support for relationships, the internal transcribed spacer (ITS) of the nuclear ribosomal DNA was aligned for several gentian sequences with reference to the ITS secondary structure proposed for Anvillea radiata (Asteraceae) using Dynalign. We present here the first secondary structure of ITS for Gentianaceae and the Asterid I clade, which may guide alignment of ITS data in other eudicot taxa. The study included 42 species, with representatives from tribes Chironieae, Gentianeae, Helieae, and Potalieae, and with the majority of species from Potalieae. Phylogenetic analyses based on secondary structure alignment using parsimony and Bayesian methods provided additional support for Gentianeae plus Helieae as the sister group to Potalieae. Prepusa (Helieae) showed ambivalent associations. Within tribe Potalieae, the subtribes Potaliinae and Lisianthiinae were supported as monophyletic. Bisgoeppertia (Chironieae) was placed unambiguously inside Lisianthius (Potalieae-Lisianthiinae) in all analyses. Neurotheca (Potalieae-Faroinae) was positioned as sister to Lisianthiinae, making subtribe Faroinae paraphyletic.
S2172	S. H. N. Monteiro;A. Selbach-Schnadelbach;R. P. d Oliveira;C. v d Berg	2008	Molecular phylogenetics of Galeandra (Orchidaceae: Catasetinae) based on plastid and nuclear DNA sequences	Systematic Botany							Galeandra is a Neotropical genus with its center of diversity in the Amazon region. It comprises approximately 18 species of epiphytic or terrestrial herbs that are easily recognizable by their infundibular labellum. The present study examined the phylogenetic relationships between species of the genus Galeandra inferred with nucleotide sequences from five DNA regions - three plastid (psbA-trnH, rpoB-trnC, and trnG-S) and two nuclear (ITS and ETS). Matrices were analyzed individually and in a combined analysis using parsimony and maximum likelihood. We found that the epiphytic species G. devoniana is sister to the remainder of the genus, and that the other species form two groups - one epiphytic species and a second composed of terrestrial species. Adaptation to the terrestrial environment from a probable epiphytic ancestral was of great importance in the evolution of Galeandra. Furthermore, the infrageneric relationships found in this study differ from all previously proposed classifications.
S2155	P. Pedraza-Peñalosa	2008	Systematics of the Neotropical Blueberry Genus Disterigma (Ericaceae)	Systematic Botany							Disterigma s.l. comprises 37 species of small shrubs found in Central and South America, mostly in cloud forests and páramos. The notion that the morphological circumscription of Disterigma s.l. is too wide and that it may not be a natural group was supported by recent molecular evidence extracted from only a few species of Disterigma. This study addresses the monophyly and position of Disterigma s.l. within the complex blueberry tribe Vaccinieae through an intensive taxon sampling. Seventy-nine species are sampled, including 84% of the species of Disterigma s.l. and 13 genera of neotropical Vaccinieae. The parsimony analysis of nrITS and ndhF data reveal that Disterigma s.l. is polyphyletic with three independent origins within Vaccinieae. The majority of the species form a well supported monophyletic group, Disterigma s.s., which is located within a large Andean clade; all the Disterigma s.s. species share the presence of a differentiated pair of apical bracteoles. Segregated from Disterigma s.s., but also Andean in origin, is the novel Central Andes Segregated Disterigma clade, where D. bracteatum, D. pentandrum, D. rimbachii, and D. ulei are found. Also resolved outside of Disterigma s.s. is D. trimerum, a taxon of Mesoamerican origin.
S2119	Y. Pillon;H. C. F. Hopkins;J. Munzinger;M. W. Chase	2008	A molecular and morphological survey of generic limits of Acsmithia and Spiraeanthemum (Cunoniaceae)	Systematic Botany							A phylogenetic analysis was conducted on the tribe Spiraeanthemeae (Cunoniaceae) to clarify relationships of the genera Acsmithia and Spiraeanthemum. Three molecular markers, one plastid region (trnL intron and trnL-trnF intergenic spacer) and two nuclear-single copy genes (ncpGS and PHYC), were sequenced for this purpose. The independent analysis of the three markers and a combined analysis all showed that the genus Acsmithia is paraphyletic with the genus Spiraeanthemum nested within it. A morphological survey of all species in the tribe confirmed the existence of two groups within Acsmithia. One comprises the species from Australia, New Guinea, and A. densiflora from New Caledonia and is characterised by multiple ovules per carpel. The other group contains all remaining New Caledonian species plus A. vitiensis from Fiji and is characterised by a single ovule per carpel. The study shows that characters previously used to distinguish Acsmithia and Spiraenthemum, phyllotaxy and sexual system, are homoplasious as in several other groups of Cunoniaceae. A broad circumscription of the genus Spiraeanthemum is adopted here that includes the species formerly placed in Acsmithia. Two new combinations are proposed: Spiraeanthemum collinum and Spiraeanthemum meridionale. Spiraeanthemum austrocaledonicum is considered a synonym of Spiraeanthemum densiflorum.
S2206	D. Quandt;S. Huttunen;R. Tangney;M. Stech	2008	Back to the future?: molecules take us back to the 1925 classification of the Lembophyllaceae (Bryopsida)	Systematic Botany							Although the Lembophyllaceae has undergone considerable revision during the last century, the generic and familial level relationships of this pleurocarpous moss family are still poorly understood. To address this problem, a generic revision of the Lembophyllaceae based on molecular data was undertaken. We analyzed two plastid markers, the trnL-trnF and the psbT-psbH region in combination with the ITS2 of nuclear ribosomal DNA. The molecular data reveal that the current circumscription of the family is too narrow and that several genera previously placed in the Lembophyllaceae should be re-included. The family includes: Bestia, Camptochaete, Dolichomitra, Dolichomitriopsis, Fallaciella, Fifea, Isothecium, Lembophyllum, Looseria stat. nov., Pilotrichella, Rigodium, Tripterocladium and Weymouthia. Looseria contains a single species: Looseria orbiculata comb. nov. Acrocladium is excluded and provisionally accommodated in the Lepyrodontaceae. Generic limits supported by the molecular data suggest a return to the early twentieth century family concept of Brotherus. The analyses indicate that the segregate genus Orthostichella is very distinct from its parent genus Pilotrichella, probably at the family level. Whereas Pilotrichella is resolved within the Lembophyllaceae, Orthostichella clusters with Porotrichum and Porothamnium forming a clade (OPP-clade) sister to the remaining Neckeraceae and Lembophyllaceae. Hence, the Neckeraceae is paraphyletic. Recognition of the OPP -clade as a new family is desirable but awaits the results of detailed ongoing morphological studies.
S2153	R. Riina;P. E. Berry;B. W. v Ee	2008	Molecular phylogenetics of the dragon's blood Croton section Cyclostigma (Euphorbiaceae), a polyphyletic assemblage unraveled	Systematic Botany							The phylogenetic relationships of Croton section Cyclostigma sensu Webster were examined using nuclear ribosomal ITS and plastid spacer trnL--F sequences from 48 of the 62 species in the group, including members of the four recognized subsections and representing the group‚s full morphological and geographic range. The two gene phylogenies concurred that section Cyclostigma sensu Webster is polyphyletic, with its members appearing in nine different clades throughout Croton. The clade that retains the taxonomic type of the section and about half of the species sampled is redefined here as a reduced, monophyletic section Cyclostigma, and the remaining species are placed in other sections or informal clades. The ITS and chloroplast phylogenies are discordant regarding the position of the redefined section Cyclostigma suggesting that reticulate evolution might have played a role in the evolutionary history of this group. These results highlight that the tree habit has evolved on multiple occasions in Croton, and that there are other morphological characters that can effectively distinguish different tree lineages in the genus.
S2154	R. Riina;P. E. Berry;B. W. v Ee	2008	Molecular phylogenetics of the dragon's blood Croton section Cyclostigma (Euphorbiaceae), a polyphyletic assemblage unraveled	Systematic Botany							The phylogenetic relationships of Croton section Cyclostigma sensu Webster were examined using nuclear ribosomal ITS and plastid spacer trnL--F sequences from 48 of the 62 species in the group, including members of the four recognized subsections and representing the group‚s full morphological and geographic range. The two gene phylogenies concurred that section Cyclostigma sensu Webster is polyphyletic, with its members appearing in nine different clades throughout Croton. The clade that retains the taxonomic type of the section and about half of the species sampled is redefined here as a reduced, monophyletic section Cyclostigma, and the remaining species are placed in other sections or informal clades. The ITS and chloroplast phylogenies are discordant regarding the position of the redefined section Cyclostigma suggesting that reticulate evolution might have played a role in the evolutionary history of this group. These results highlight that the tree habit has evolved on multiple occasions in Croton, and that there are other morphological characters that can effectively distinguish different tree lineages in the genus.
S2189	P. E. Rothrock;A. A. Reznicek;A. L. Hipp	2008	Taxonomic study of the Carex tenera group (Cyperaceae)	Systematic Botany							According to previous molecular study, the Carex tenera group sensu lato consists of C. tenera s.l. and C. normalis in one clade and C. festucacea, C. oronensis, and C. tincta in a sister clade. We found that Carex tincta, clarified by thorough review of herbarium materials, has a much narrower geographic range than previously thought, centering on Maine (USA), adjacent states, and adjacent portions of Canada with rare scattered occurrences to western Lake Superior. Carex tenera has traditionally been thought to consist of two varieties: the transcontinental variety tenera and the upper Midwest (USA) variety echinodes. In light of ecological and chromosomal differences, AFLP genetic distances, and morphological analysis the latter should be recognized as a distinct species, Carex echinodes comb. et stat. nov. Carex echinodes and narrow-leaved forms of C. normalis can be challenging to differentiate morphologically, but widest leaf width, inflorescence internode length, peduncle diameter, and growth habit separate the two taxa. New chromosome numbers are reported, with those of C. tenera (n = 24+2III, 26, 27, 28) having a lower range than either those of C. echinodes (n = 37, 38, 39) or C. normalis (n = 34, 35, 36).
S1860	E. Ruiz-Sánchez;V. Sosa;M. T. Mejia-Saulés	2008	Phylogenetics of Otatea Inferred from Morphology and Chloroplast DNA Sequence Data, and Recircumscription of Guaduinae (Poaceae: Bambusoideae)	Systematic Botany	33	2	277-283	10.1600/036364408784571644			Representative taxa of the five genera of Guaduinae, a subtribe of Neotropical woody bamboos, were sampled to investigate the phylogenetic relationships of the species of the genus Otatea using morphological and molecular (cpDNA intergenic spacer trnHâ•„psbA and the rpl16 intron) evidence. Phylogenetic analysis of a combined data set retrieved 53 most parsimonious trees in which subtribe Guaduinae is monophyletic if two species of Aulonemia (A. clarkiae and A. fulgor) are included. They were previously classified within subtribe Arthrostylidiinae. Guaduinae is supported by the lack of papillae from the abaxial surface, by an almost solid style, a short rachis extension, and oral setae present in culm and foliage leaves. Monophyly of the genera in Guaduinae (Eremocaulon, Guadua, Apoclada, Otatea, and Olmeca) was corroborated. Otatea species formed a monophyletic clade, supported by culms with three subequal ascending branches and pubescent lemmas. Eight species in Guaduinae (the four species in Otatea, Olmeca recta, O. reflexa, Aulonemia clarkiae, and A. fulgor) are distributed in southeastern Mexico in areas determined as Pleistocene refugia. Some of them possess baccoid caryopses and long culm necks, and grow in threatened vegetation types such as cloud, tropical, and tropical deciduous forests, so they are important bamboos to preserve.
S2081	I. Sánchez-del Pino;T. Borsch;T. J. Motley	2008	trnL-F and rpl16 sequence data and dense taxon sampling reveal monophyly of unilocular anthered Gomphrenoideae (Amaranthaceae) and an improved picture of their internal relationships	Systematic Botany							The Amaranthaceae-Chenopodiaceae alliance has been the focus of several phylogenetic studies, but major questions concerning the internal relationships of Amaranthaceae still remain unanswered. This study aims to test the monophyly of the subfamily Gomphrenoideae and to examine the generic relationships within this group. Parsimony and Bayesian analyses of trnL-F and rpl16 show that the subfamily Gomphrenoideae is monophyletic. The clade of Gomphrenoideae represents a large and diverse radiation of the Amaranthaceae in the New World. Unilocular anthers are a morphological synapomorphy for Gomphrenoideae that was derived from bilocular anthers. Three major clades are resolved: the Gomphrenoids, the Alternantheroids, and the Iresinoids, which are largely supported by pollen morphology. The Iresinoid clade is sister to Alternantheroids plus Gomphrenoids, rendering metareticulate pollen as the synapomorphy for the latter two clades. Tribes and subtribes delimited by androecium and inflorescence characters are poly- or paraphyletic. Several genera are monophyletic including the large genus Alternanthera, whereas Gomphrena is polyphyletic. Irenella and Woehleria are resolved within Iresine whereas Blutaparon and Litophila fall within the polyphyletic Gomphrena. The trnL-F and rpl16 sequence data are the most variable chloroplast regions examined to date for the family and are highly effective in resolving relationships in Amaranthaceae.
S2087	G. Sancho;V. Karaman-Castro	2008	A Phylogenetic Study in American Podocominae (Asteraceae: Astereae) based on Morphological and Molecular Data	Systematic Botany							A molecular and morphological phylogenetic analysis of South American Podocominae is herein performed. Taxa of both South American and Australasian Podocominae as well as members of other subtribes of Astereae were included in the analyses. Sequence data from the nuclear internal transcribed spacer (ITS), and the plastid trnL-trnF intergenic spacer regions were used in the molecular analysis to assess relationships among the South American genera of Podocominae. The trnL-trnF intergenic spacer provided only six informative characters. In contrast, the ITS region was more variable. Our results showed that: 1) neither the South American genera of Podocominae nor the whole subtribe Podocominae are monophyletic; 2) South American and Australasian genera, initially placed in the subtribe Podocominae on the basis of morphological characters, show no evidence of close relationship in our phylogenetic analyses based on molecular data; 3) Our results do not confirm Podocoma in its current concept as monophyletic; 4) Asteropsis, Inulopsis, Microgyne, and Sommerfeltia form a close assemblage; 5) Microgyne is monophyletic when molecular and morphological phylogenetic analyses are performed, thus supporting previous morphology based studies; and 6) the morphological characters used to define the subtribe Podocominae are homoplastic in the context of the present morphological and DNA sequence based phylogenetic analyses.
S1987	A. J. Shaw;R. E. Andrus;B. Shaw	2008	A new arctic species of Sphagnum (Bryophyta) based on morphological and molecular data	Systematic Botany							A new species of Sphagnum section Subsecunda, S. beringiensis, is described from arctic Alaska from the vicinity of Barrow along the northern coast. The species is distinguished morphologically by the light, yellow-green color of the gametophytes, multistratose stem cortex with 2-3 layers of enlarged thin-walled cells, round, medium-size (ca. 5 µm diameter) outer branch leaf pores, scattered inner branch leaf pores, few outer stem leaf pores, and abundant, round inner stem leaf pores. Two unique plastid DNA haplotypes occur among Barrow area plants of S. beringiensis, and these differ by a minimum of three nucleotide substitutions from those of other Alaskan Sphagnum species in the section Subsecunda. Microsatellite markers show that S. beringiensis is genetically variable despite the fact that all plants were sampled from within an area of a few km2 and neither gametangia nor sporophytes have been observed. A key to the six Alaskan species of Sphagnum section Subsecunda is provided.
S2150	S. Stefanović;B. E. Pfeil;J. D. Palmer;J. J. Doyle	2008	Relationships among phaseoloid legumes based on sequences from eight chloroplast regions	Systematic Botany							Generic level relationships in phaseoloid legumes have received much attention using chloroplast DNA markers, however, despite this attention not all relationships are yet well-resolved. This study includes trnL-F sequences from across a wide sample of phaseoloid legumes as well as seven additional chloroplast DNA loci (rbcL, atpB, trnK/matK, rpl2, clpP, rps16, and ycf4) analyzed separately and in combination. Together, these data provide support for many relationships generally consistent with but only weakly supported in earlier studies. Some major discordant phylogenetic results were found in our separate analyses; for example, ycf4 sequences group Glycine and Teramnus with strong support; however, the combined analysis of the remaining seven loci found incongruent groupings (Glycine and Psoraleeae genera; Teramnus and Amphicarpaea) also with strong support. Network analysis of ycf4 revealed that the conflicting signal (relative to the other seven loci) came from 1st and 2nd codon positions. These positions also showed a significant rate acceleration, together indicating that selection driving convergent molecular evolution is the likely cause of the signal in ycf4, rather than shared history. The major clades within the phaseoloid legumes supported by our analysis are discussed.
S2161	N. Theis;M. J. Donoghue;J. Li	2008	Phylogenetics of the Caprifolieae and Lonicera (Dipsicales) based on nuclear and chloroplast DNA sequences	Systematic Botany							Recent phylogenetic analyses of the Dipsacales strongly support a Caprifolieae clade within the Caprifoliaceae including Leycesteria, Triosteum, Symphoricarpos, and Lonicera. Relationships within Caprifolieae, however, remain quite uncertain, and the monophyly of Lonicera, the most species-rich of the traditional genera, and its subdivisions, need to be evaluated. In this study we used sequences of the ITS region of nuclear ribosomal DNA and five chloroplast non-coding regions (rpoB-trnC spacer, atpB-rbcL spacer, trnS-trnG spacer, petN-psbM spacer, and psbMˆtrnD spacer) to address these problems. Our results indicate that Heptacodium is sister to the Caprifolieae, Triosteum is sister to the remaining genera within the tribe, and Leycesteria and Symphoricarpos form a clade that is sister to a monophyletic Lonicera. Within Lonicera, the major split is between subgenus Caprifolium and subgenus Lonicera. Within subgenus Lonicera, sections Coeloxylosteum, Isoxylosteum, and Nintooa are nested within the paraphyletic section Isika. Section Nintooa may also be non-monophyletic. Our analysis of the genus Lonicera highlights instances of homoplasy in several morphological characters (e.g., hollow stems in subgenus Caprifolium and section Coeloxylosteum in subgenus Lonicera). Furthermore, our data indicate possible instances of hybridization in section Nintooa and biogeographic disjuctions between the Old and New Worlds (e.g., subsections Distegiae and Alpigenae).
S1923	N. P. Tippery;D. H. Les;D. J. Padgett;S. W. L. Jacobs	2008	Generic circumscription in Menyanthaceae: a phylogenetic evaluation	Systematic Botany							Menyanthaceae consist of five genera of aquatic and wetland plants distributed worldwide. The three monotypic genera (Liparophyllum, Menyanthes, Nephrophyllidium) are clearly differentiated morphologically, but the two larger genera (Nymphoides, Villarsia) contain several taxa of uncertain affinity. We undertook a phylogenetic analysis, using a combination of morphological and molecular data, to resolve relationships among species and to evaluate the current circumscription of genera. DNA sequence data for nuclear (ITS) and chloroplast (rbcL, trnK/matK) gene regions were largely congruent (by partition-homogeneity test), and a combined data phylogeny revealed several strongly supported relationships. Analyses using asterid outgroup taxa supported the monophyly of Menyanthaceae. Menyanthes trifoliata and Nephrophyllidium crista-galli comprised a clade sister to the remainder of the family. Species of Nymphoides, except N. exigua, resolved to a single, deeply-nested clade, indicating that the floating-leaved habit is derived evolutionarily within the family. The genus Villarsia comprised a paraphyletic grade toward Nymphoides, wherein the species resolved to three assemblages: (1) a shallowly nested clade containing V. albiflora, V. calthifolia, V. marchantii, V. parnassifolia, V. reniformis, and V. umbricola; (2) an isolated South African clade including V. manningiana and the type species, V. capensis; and (3) a heterogeneous clade of taxa from three genera, including V. exaltata, V. lasiosperma, and V. latifolia, plus the anomalous species V. capitata, V. congestiflora, Liparophyllum gunnii, and Nymphoides exigua. Our results indicate that the genera Menyanthes, Nephrophyllidium, and Nymphoides should be retained as circumscribed, with the exception that Nymphoides exigua should be restored to Villarsia. The genus Villarsia, however, eventually should be subdivided among monophyletic lineages, whereby in the strict sense Villarsia would contain only South African taxa.
S2148	B. van Ee;P. E. Berry	2008	A phylogenetic and taxonomic review of Croton (Euphorbiaceae s.s.) on Jamaica including the description of Croton favocalcaris, a new species of section Eluteria	Systematic Botany							The greater Caribbean region has played an important role in the early diversification of Croton (Euphorbiaceae s.s.). Jamaica is also important to Croton taxonomy given that several species were first described from material from the island. The Jamaican species of Croton are found in six different sections indicating that there were at least six separate over-water dispersal events of the genus to the island. Croton favocalcaris (section Eluteria), a new species endemic to limestone hills along the southern coast of Jamaica is described and illustrated. The species is phylogenetically most closely related to C. laurinus Sw. and C. grisebachianus Müll.Arg. ˜both also endemic to Jamaica. Several lectotypifications and novel synonymies are required to clarify the taxonomy of the species that have been described from Jamaica, some of which are widespread in the region.
S2186	A. S. Vega;G. H. Rua;L. T. Fabbri;Z. E. Rúgolo de Agrasar	2008	A Morphology-based Cladistic Analysis of Digitaria (Poaceae, Panicoideae, Paniceae)	Systematic Botany							A phylogenetic analysis was performed on 67 species of Digitaria belonging to four subgenera and 26 of the 32 sections recognized in Henrard's monograph. The analysis was based on 113 discrete and six continuous morphological characters. In the resulting topologies the genus Digitaria was monophyletic. In spite of the low support for most groupings, several clades were recovered. The subdivision of Digitaria in the four subgenera proposed by Henrard was not supported since the large subgenus Digitaria appears as a paraphyletic assemblage within which the other three subgenera are nested. Nevertheless, the monophyly of some of Henrard's sections was supported. This is the first approach to the phylogeny of Digitaria. Keywords˜Cladistic, Digitaria, Paniceae, phylogeny, Poaceae, systematics.
S2174	C. A. Wilson	2008	Phylogenetic relationships among the recognized series in Iris section Limniris	Systematic Botany							Phylogenetic relationships among the 16 series within section Limniris were reconstructed based on chloroplast sequence data, and using maximum likelihood and Bayesian inference methods. Section Limniris is polyphyletic as currently delineated because series Spuriae, Foetidissimae, Syriacae, Longipetalae, Vernae, Unguiculares, and some elements of Tenuifoliae are placed outside of the core group of Limniris species. The most inclusive monophyletic clade of Limniris species includes the series Californicae, Sibericae, Laevigatae, Tripetalae, Prismaticae, Ensatae, Ruthenicae, Hexagonae, and Chinensis, and I. songarica. Within the core Limniris clade series Sibericae, Tripetalae, and Chinensis are polyphyletic while Laevigatae is paraphyletic. With one exception, species within the core Limniris group are distributed in either Asia or North America, with a few Asian species extending into Europe and for the most widespread species, Iris pseudacorus (series Laevigatae), into northern Africa with naturalized populations in North America. The one exception is I. setosa with a native range that includes both eastern Asia and North America.
S2137	A. C. Worley;H. Ghazvini;D. W. Schemske	2008	A phylogeny of the genus Polemonium based on amplified fragment length polymorphism (AFLP) markers	Systematic Botany							The genus Polemonium is composed of animal-pollinated herbs found largely in North America. Wide phenotypic variation suggests rapid evolution of floral and vegetative morphology. However, phylogenetic relationships within Polemonium have received little attention. We present a phylogeny of Polemonium based on 1676 Amplified Fragment Length Polymorphisms (AFLPs). We obtained similar topologies through minimum evolution analysis using Nei-Li genetic distances, and parsimony analysis. Our analyses supported the monophyly of most species, and indicated that the single annual species, P. micranthum, is sister to all perennial species. Relationships were well resolved among species separated by genetic distances < 0.16. Three well-supported clades each included taxa from one of three species complexes: the P. caeruleum complex, the P. pulcherrimum complex, or the P. viscosum complex. Relationships within clades were generally consistent with earlier systematic work. Exceptions were the inclusion of eastern North American P. reptans within the P. caeruleum clade, inclusion of P. boreale within the P. pulcherrimum clade, and a close relationship between tetraploid P. californicum and diploid P. pulcherrimum subsp. delicatum. Our results indicate that floral traits are quite divergent among close relatives within the genus, and provide a phylogenetic framework for research on adaptation and speciation in Polemonium.
S2015	E. Schuettpelz;A. L. Grusz;M. D. Windham;K. M. Pryer	2008	The utility of nuclear gapCp in resolving polyploid fern origins	Systematic Botany	33	4	621-629	10.1600/036364408786500127			Although polyploidy is rampant in ferns and plays a major role in shaping their diversity, the evolutionary history of many polyploid species remains poorly understood. Nuclear DNA sequences can provide valuable information for identifying polyploid origins; however, remarkably few nuclear markers have been developed specifically for ferns, and previously published primer sets are far from universal. In this study, we present new primer sequences for the amplification of a portion of the nuclear gapCp gene. Through a broad survey across ferns, we demonstrate that these primers are nearly universal for this clade. With a case study in cheilanthoids, we show that this rapidly evolving marker is a powerful tool for discriminating between autopolyploids and allopolyploids. Our results indicate that gapCp holds considerable potential for addressing species-level questions across the fern tree of life.
S2332	V. Karaman-Castro;L. E. Urbatsch	2009	Phylogeny of Hinterhubera Group and Related Genera (Hinterhuberinae: Astereae) Based on the nrDNA ITS and ETS Sequences	Systematic Botany	34	4	805-817	10.1600/036364409790139772			The phylogenetic relationships of six out of seven genera from the informal Hinterhubera group (Hinterhuberinae) and nine other subtribes in tribe Astereae primarily with Southern Hemisphere distributions were studied using internal and external transcribed spacer region nuclear DNA (ITS and ETS) sequence data. Bayesian and parsimony analyses were conducted on both datasets independently and combined. Topologies resulting from the ITS and combined data sets were highly congruent, while the ETS based phylogenies were poorly resolved probably due to there being fewer and a lower level of informative characters. The monophyly of the Hinterhubera group was not confirmed, as well as the monophyly of the subtribes Podocominae, Baccharidinae, Lagenophorinae, Grangeinae, and Asterinae as had been delimited by Nesom and Robinson. Instead, our results suggest a closer relationship among the taxa from similar geographic areas rather than according to their current subtribal classification. Within the Hinterhubera group, the monophyly of the genera has been confirmed. Westoniella was sister to Laennecia (Podocominae), while Hinterhubera appeared sister to Laestadia and Blakiella. The radiate Diplostephium and Guynesomia were disparately placed in the Southern Hemisphere clade and not related to the other radiate genera of Hinterhuberinae. Present analyses suggest that dioecy in Aztecaster and Baccharidinae evolved independently as hypothesized by Nesom. Archibaccharis (Baccharidinae) was sister to Plagiocheilus (Grangeinae). The analyses of ITS and ETS data, and Bayesian analysis of the combined dataset, resolved Baccharidinae nonmonophyletic. Constraint analyses forcing a monophyletic Baccharidinae, with Plagiocheilus sister to Archibaccharis, did not reject monophyly of the subtribe.
S2239	W. L. Clement;G. D. Weiblen	2009	Morphological evolution in the mulberry family (Moraceae)	Systematic Botany	34	3	530-552	10.1600/036364409789271155			The mulberry family Moraceae comprises 37 genera and approximately 1,100 species distributed throughout tropical and temperate regions worldwide. Moraceae exhibit a complex array of inflorescence architectures, breeding systems, and pollination syndromes, which forms the basis of traditional taxonomic classification. However, morphologically based classification conflicts with evolutionary relationships proposed by molecular phylogenetics. In this study we assembled a morphological character matrix for analysis separately and in combination with existing molecular data. We evaluated 81 vegetative, reproductive, and wood anatomical characters for 94 species representing nearly all Moraceae genera. Using parsimony and Bayesian methods, these characters were evaluated with respect to ndhF chloroplast and 26S nuclear DNA sequences. Topological comparisons tested whether opposing classification schemes are more or less supported by the data. Results did not support any classification of Moraceae based on morphology. We present a revised tribal classification and describe a new tribe, Maclureae, two subtribes of Castilleae, Castillineae and Antiaropsineae, and reinstate the genera Malaisia (including Malaisia scandens) and Sloetia (including Sloetia elongata). Lastly we discuss the evolution of inflorescence architecture in relation to other floral features.
S2255	D. S. Gernandt;S. Hernandez-Leon;E. Salgado-Hernandez;J. A. P. d l Rosa	2009	Phylogenetic relationships of Pinus subsection Ponderosae inferred from rapidly evolving cpDNA regions	Systematic Botany	34	3	481-491	10.1600/036364409789271290			Pinus subsection Ponderosae comprises approximately 17 tree species distributed from western Canada to Nicaragua. We inferred phylogenetic relationships of multiple accessions for all widely recognized species from 3.7 kb of cpDNA sequence (matK, trnD-trnY-trnE spacer, chlN-ycf1 spacer, and ycf1). The sister relationship between subsections Ponderosae and Australes was corroborated with high branch support, and several clades were identified within subsection Ponderosae. Pinus jeffreyi was sister to P. coulteri, P. sabiniana, and P. torreyana. Californian accessions of P. ponderosa and P. washoensis occurred in a clade separate from P. arizonica and P. scopulorum from the southwestern United States. Western Mexican species P. cooperi and P. durangensis had cpDNA sequences identical to one or more accessions of P. arizonica and P. scopulorum, and together these taxa were closely related to clades of P. engelmannii-P. devoniana (Mexico) and P. douglasiana-P. yecorensis-P. maximinoi (western Mexico to Guatemala). A third well supported clade of taxa from Mexico and Central America exhibited the lowest sequence divergence and included P. pseudostrobus, P. montezumae, P. hartwegii, P. maximinoi (one of three accessions), P. nubicola, and P. donnell-smithii. Chloroplast DNA sequences were nonmonophyletic for most species, although the degree of support varied.
S2197	A. R. Magee;B. E. v Wyk;P. M. Tilney;S. R. Downie	2009	Generic delimitations and relationships of the Cape genera Capnophyllum, Dasispermum and Sonderina, the North African genera Krubera and Stoibrax, and a new monotypic genus of the subfamily Apioideae (Apiaceae)	Systematic Botany	34	3	580-594	DO:10.1600/036364409789271218			Generic circumscriptions and phylogenetic relationships of the Cape genera Capnophyllum, Dasispermum and Sonderina are explored through maximum parsimony and Bayesian inference analyses of ITS and cpDNA rps16 intron sequences, morphology and combined data. The putative relationship of these genera with the North African genera Krubera and Stoibrax is also assessed. Analyses of both molecular data sets place Capnophyllum, Dasispermum, Sonderina and the only southern African species of Stoibrax (S. capense) within the newly recognized Lefebvrea clade of tribe Tordylieae. Capnophyllum is strongly supported as monophyletic and is distantly related to Krubera. The monotypic genus Dasispermum and Stoibrax capense are imbedded within a paraphyletic Sonderina. This complex is distantly related to the North African species of Stoibrax in tribe Apieae, in which the type species, Stoibrax dichotomum, occurs. As a result, the genus Dasispermum is expanded to include both Sonderina and Stoibrax capense. New combinations are formalized for Dasispermum capense, D. hispidum, D. humile and D. tenue. An undescribed species from the Tanqua Karoo in South Africa is also closely related to Capnophyllum and the DasispermumˆSonderina complex. The genus Scaraboides is described herein to accommodate this unique new species, S. manningii. This monotypic genus shares the dorsally compressed fruit and involute marginal wings with Capnophyllum but is easily distinguished by its erect branching habit, green leaves, scabrous umbels, and fruit with indistinct dorsal ribs, additional solitary vittae in each marginal wing, and parallel, closely spaced commissural vittae. Despite the marked fruit similarities with Capnophyllum, analyses of DNA sequence data place Scaraboides closer to the DasispermumˆSonderina complex, with which it shares the erect habit, green (non-glaucous) leaves and scabrous umbels.
S2267	J. S. Miller;A. Kamath;R. A. Levin	2009	Do multiple tortoises equal a hare? The utility of nine noncoding plastid regions for species-level phylogenetics in tribe Lycieae (Solanaceae)	Systematic Botany	34	4	796-804	10.1600/036364409790139709			The identification of plastid DNA markers that provide sufficient phylogenetic resolution at the species and population levels is an important challenge for plant systematics. This is mainly due to the relatively slow rate of evolution of the plastid genome. In this study, we examine the utility of several plastid DNA regions for phylogenetic inference at low taxonomic levels in tribe Lycieae (Solanaceae). The regions employed here previously provided considerable numbers of potentially informative characters in investigations of sequence variation across the plastid genome, and one region (trnH-psbA) has been advocated for use in DNA barcoding. We sequenced nine noncoding plastid DNA regions (~8400bp) for a diverse sample of Lycium species and Phrodus microphyllus (tribe Lycieae), as well as the outgroup Nolana, and included published sequences from the distant outgroup Atropa. The nine regions varied with regard to their phylogenetic utility, as measured by the numbers of variable and parsimony informative characters and informative insertions/deletions. We advocate a combination of three regions, including trnDGUCˆtrnTGGU, rpl32ˆtrnLUAG, and ndhFˆrpl32, for phylogenetic studies at the infrageneric or tribal level in Solanaceae. Collectively, these three plastid DNA regions had >100 variable characters across 24 taxa, with 72 parsimony informative characters, and 10 phylogenetically informative indels. Future studies should explore these three noncoding markers for low level phylogenetic questions in other taxonomic groups.
S2214	F. Rodriguez;D. M. Spooner	2009	Nitrate reductase phylogeny of potato (Solanum sect. Petota) genomes with emphasis on the origins of the polyploid species	Systematic Botany	34	1	207-219	10.1600/036364409787602195			Solanum section Petota is taxonomically difficult, partly because of interspecific hybridization at both the diploid and polyploid levels. There is much disagreement regarding species boundaries and affiliation of species to series. Elucidating the phylogenetic relationships within the polyploids is crucial for an effective taxonomic treatment of the section and for the utilization of wild potato germplasm in breeding programs. We here infer relationships among the potato diploids and polyploids using nitrate reductase (NIA) sequence data in comparison to prior plastid phylogenies and: 1) examine genome types within section Petota, 2) show species in the polyploid series Conicibaccata, Longipedicellata, and in the Iopetalum group to be derived from allopolyploidization, 3) support an earlier hypothesis by confirming S. verrucosum as the maternal genome donor for the polyploid species S. demissum as well as species in the Iopetalum Group, 4) demonstrate that S. verrucosum is the closest relative to the maternal genome donor for species in ser. Longipedicellata, 5) support the close relationship between S. acaule and diploid species from series Megistacroloba and Tuberosa, and 6) show the North and Central American B genome species to be well distinguished from the A genome species of South America.
S2254	A. C. Scheen;V. A. Albert	2009	Molecular phylogenetics of the Leucas group (Lamioideae; Lamiaceae)	Systematic Botany	34	1	173-181	10.1600/036364409787602366			The genus Leucas R.Br. includes 100 recognized species ranging in distribution from Africa through the Indian subcontinent to Queensland, Australia. Morphological cladistic studies have suggested that several other genera of Lamioideae ˆ Acrotome, Isoleucas, Leonotis, Otostegia (pro parte) ˆ may be closely related to Leucas, or even nested within it. Here we use phylogenetic analysis of three plastid DNA loci, the trnL-F region, trnS-G spacer, and the rps16 intron and reach similar conclusions. Many of the morphological features used to maintain Leucas since 1810 are shared ancestral (symplesiomorphic) characters. The other genera (or subgeneric group in the case of Otostegia) are therefore defined by apomorphic states. This is particularly apparent in the case of Leonotis, with its highly specialized bird-pollinated flowers, derived within a paraphyletic and insect-pollinated Leucas. Some geographically isolated groups are monophyletic, including all Asian species of Leucas, a Socotran clade, and a large African lineage.
S2285	A. M. Amorim;R. Goldenberg;F. A. Michelangeli	2009	A new species of Physeterostemon (Melastomataceae) from Bahia, Brazil, with notes on the phylogeny the genus	Systematic Botany	34	2	324-329	10.1600/036364409788606389			Physeterostemon thomasii is described from the southern Bahian Atlantic forest of Brazil. It differs from the other two species of the genus by the paleaceous trichomes on young stems and petioles, and by the strongly bullate/foveolate leaves. A phylogenetic analysis with all three species, based on rbcL and ndhF dna sequence data, showed that Physeterostemon forms a monophyletic group, sister to Eriocnema fulva, and this clade is placed in a polytomy at the base of the tribe Miconieae sensu stricto. However, there is no resolution within Physeterostemon, thus the phylogenetic relationships of the three species cannot be established.
S2275	T. L. P. Couvreur;R. W. J. M. van der Ham;M. Y. Mbele;F. Mbago;D. M. Johnson	2009	Molecular and morphological characterization of a new monotypic genus of Annonaceae, Mwasumbia, from Tanzania	Systematic Botany	34	2	266-276	10.1600/036364409788606398			The coastal lowland rain forests of eastern Africa are well known for their high levels of plant endemism. A new genus of Annonaceae, Mwasumbia, is described from Tanzania, underscoring this high biodiversity and represented by a single species, Mwasumbia alba. The new genus presents several morphological characters suggesting a close relationship to two other African genera, Greenwayodendron and Polyceratocarpus. Maximum parsimony and Bayesian molecular phylogenetic analyses based on two plastid markers, rbcL and the trnL-trnF region, strongly support the close relationship of these three genera to one another as well as to two other African genera, Annickia and Piptostigma. Together these five genera form a moderately supported clade within the so-called short-branch clade of Annonaceae. A detailed morphological and palynological comparison between Mwasumbia and the four other genera shows that this new genus exhibits a combination of features unique within this group: intermediate tertiary leaf venation, exclusively bisexual flowers, slightly imbricate sepals, valvate petals, outer and inner petals equal in length, numerous stamens, four carpels, few and uniseriate ovules, few and sessile monocarps, and verrucate sulculate pollen grains. Phylogenetic analyses also suggest the genus Piptostigma, as currently circumscribed, to be paraphyletic. An IUCN conservation status of VU D2 is proposed, reflecting the narrow distribution of the single species.
S2301	M. D. Pirie;B. B. Klitgaard;R. T. Pennington	2009	Revision and biogeography of Centrolobium (Leguminosae)	Systematic Botany	34	2	345-359	10.1600/036364409788606262			A taxonomic revision and biogeographic study of the genus Centrolobium (Leguminosae - Papilionoideae) is presented. Centrolobium includes important timber trees distributed disjunctly in seasonally dry tropical forests and rain forests in Central and South America, from Panama to south-eastern Brazil. It is characterized by large samaroid pods with a spiny seed case and an abundance of orange peltate glands covering the leaves and inflorescences. Taxonomic distinctions between some species of Centrolobium have been a source of confusion. Here, seven species are recognized: C. robustum, C. microchaete, C. tomentosum, C. ochroxylum, C. sclerophyllum, C. paraense and C. yavizanum. Previously recognized varieties of C. paraense; C. paraense var. paraense and C. paraense var. orinocense are not maintained. Phylogenetic analysis of DNA sequence data from the internal transcribed spacer region of nuclear ribosomal DNA and the plastid matK gene and trnL-trnF intron and spacer support the monophyly of the genus. Different molecular dating methods indicate that the Centrolobium crown group and lineages found to the west and east of the Andes diverged before the Pleistocene. Divergences between species occurring east of the Andes, particularly in Bolivia and south-eastern Brazil are more recent, but nevertheless unlikely to be explained by Pleistocene climatic changes.
S2289	J. J. Morawetz;A. D. Wolfe	2009	Assessing the monophyly of Alectra and its relationship to Melasma (Orobanchaceae)	Systematic Botany	34	3	561-569	10.1600/036364409789271281			Alectra (Orobanchaceae) consists of primarily hemiparasitic herbaceous species distributed mainly in sub-Saharan Africa, with two species native to tropical America, and two widespread species extending out of Africa into India and China. Despite containing an economically important noxious agricultural weed, Alectra has never been the subject of a phylogenetic analysis. The monophyly of Alectra was assessed using DNA sequences from the nuclear (ITS) and chloroplast (rpl16, trnT-L) genomes, including 11 of 12 species. One of two holoparasitic species, Alectra alba, was placed outside of Alectra, supported as sister to a lineage containing the Asian holoparasitic genera Aeginetia + Christisonia. Two highly supported lineages of Melasma were revealed: one containing the two included African species, and the other comprising the tropical American Melasma rhinanthoides and the single accession of the tropical American Escobedia. The placement of the Madagascan endemic Alectra fruticosa was shown to be unresolved in relationship to the remaining Alectra species and the two lineages containing Melasma. The monophyly of the remaining species of Alectra was highly supported.
S2277	H. Schneider;A. R. Smith;K. M. Pryer	2009	Is Morphology Really at Odds with Molecules in Estimating Fern Phylogeny?	Systematic Botany	34	3	455-475	10.1600/036364409789271209			Using a morphological data set of 136 vegetative and reproductive characters, we infer tracheophyte phylogeny, with an emphasis on early divergences of ferns (monilophytes). The data set comprises morphological, anatomical, biochemical, and some DNA structural characters for a taxon sample of 35 species, including representatives of all major lineages of vascular plants, especially ferns. Phylogenetic relationships among vascular plants are reconstructed using maximum parsimony and Bayesian inference. Both approaches yield similar relationships and provide evidence for three major lineages of extant vascular plants: lycophytes, ferns, and seed plants. Lycophytes are sister to the euphyllophyte clade, which comprises the fern and seed plant lineages. The fern lineage consists of five clades: horsetails, whisk ferns, ophioglossoids, marattioids, and leptosporangiate ferns. This lineage is supported by characters of the spore wall and has a parsimony bootstrap value of 76%, although the posterior probability is much below 0.95. Each of the five fern clades is well supported, but the relationships among them lack statistical support. Our independent phylogenetic analyses of morphological evidence recover the same deep phylogenetic relationships among tracheophytes as found in previous studies utilizing DNA sequence data, but differ in some ways within seed plants and within ferns. We discuss the extensive independent evolution of the five extant fern clades and the evidence for the placement of horsetails in our morphological analyses, evidence including non-homogeneity of morphological variation.
S2489	V. R. Almeida;A. F. Costa;A. M. Oliveira;V. G. L. Esteves;R. C. O. Arruda;R. C. Forzza	2009	Morphological phylogenetics of Quesnelia (Bromeliaceae, Bromelioideae)	Systematic Botany	34	4	660-672	10.1600/036364409790139619			The genus Quesnelia presently includes 18 species, which occur mainly near the east coast of Brazil from the states of Rio de Janeiro to Bahia. The genus has been divided into two subgenera, Quesnelia and Billbergiopsis. However, its generic and subgeneric delimitation is artificial: in several classifications proposed in the family, different investigators have questioned the naturalness of the group, noting its affinity with species of Aechmea and Billbergia. With the objective of assessing the monophyly of the genus, and evaluating the subgeneric delimitation and the relationship of its species to other genera, a phylogenetic analysis was carried out, based on parsimony and using the program PAUP version 4.0. The analysis included 33 taxa, with 92 morphological characters. The genera Quesnelia and Aechmea emerged as polyphyletic, and Billbergia as monophyletic. In regard to the subgeneric classification, Quesnelia subgenus Quesnelia emerged as monophyletic, and Quesnelia subgenus Billbergiopsis as polyphyletic. The majority of the species of Quesnelia subgenus Billbergiopsis emerged as the sister group to Billbergia. Even when anatomical and palynological characters were included, the consistency index of the tree obtained was very low, indicating high levels of homoplasy in the group. In addition, the majority of the clades formed did not have good statistical support. Therefore, taxonomic changes are not proposed because these would be very premature.
S2268	M. W. Ellis;J. M. Roper;R. Gainer;J. P. Der;P. G. Wolf	2009	The taxonomic designation of Eriogonum corymbosum var. nilesii (Polygonaceae) is supported by AFLP and cpDNA analyses	Systematic Botany	34	4	693-703	10.1600/036364409790139736			We examined populations of perennial, shrubby buckwheats in the Eriogonum corymbosum complex and related Eriogonum species in the subgenus Eucycla, to assess genetic affiliations of the recently named E. corymbosum var. nilesii. The known populations of this variety are all located in Clark County, Nevada, USA. We compared AFLP profiles and chloroplast DNA sequences of plants sampled from populations of E. corymbosum var. nilesii with those of plants representing other E. corymbosum varieties and related Eriogonum species from Colorado, Utah, northern Arizona, and northern New Mexico. We found evidence of genetic cohesion among the Clark County populations as well as their genetic divergence from populations of other E. corymbosum varieties and species. The genetic component uncovered in this study supports the morphological findings upon which the nomenclatural change was based, attesting to the taxonomic distinctness of this biological entity.
S2340	A. E. Fisher;J. K. Triplett;C. S. Ho;A. D. Schiller;K. A. Oltrogge;E. S. Schroder;S. A. Kelchner;L. G. Clark	2009	Paraphyly in the bamboo subtribe Chusqueinae (Poaceae: Bambusoideae) and a revised infrageneric classification for Chusquea	Systematic Botany	34	4	673-683	10.1600/036364409790139790			A phylogenetic analysis of five coding and non-coding chloroplast loci, totaling 6.6 kilobases of aligned nucleotide and indel characters, suggests that the large neotropical bamboo genus Chusquea is embedded within the much smaller Andean genus Neurolepis. Monophyly of each taxon was anticipated due to the unique occurrence of dimorphic multiple buds in Chusquea and the lack of aerial branching in Neurolepis. We tested whether the unexpected placement of Chusquea might be the result of a biased analysis. Both Neurolepis and the outgroup taxa have long branches that could influence rooting and inferred ingroup relationships. A number of methods were employed to test for long-branch attraction and sampling effects in our topology. Alternative hypothesis testing using a conservative form of the Shimodaira-Hasegawa test indicated that paraphyly of Neurolepis is a significantly better explanation of the data than monophyly, even when models of character evolution are changed. Given the robustness of the topology, high support measures for clades on the tree, and the results of the Shimodaira-Hasegawa tests, we conclude that chloroplast genomes indicate probable paraphyly of Neurolepis with respect to Chusquea. The species of Neurolepis are therefore transferred to Chusquea, resulting in the following new combinations and names: Chusquea acuminatissima, C. angusta, C. asymmetrica, C. cylindrica, C. diversiglumis, C. elata, C. fimbriligulata, C. laegaardii, C. magnifolia, C. mollis, C. nana, C. nobilis, C. petiolata, C. rigida, C. silverstonei, C. spectabilis, C. steyermarkii, C. stuebelii, C. tovari and C. villosa. The names Neurolepis elata, N. stuebelii, N. weberbaueri, Planotia ingens, and P. tessellata are lectotypified.
S2400	D. H. Les;N. M. Murray;N. P. Tippery	2009	Systematics of Two Imperiled Pondweeds (Potamogeton vaseyi, P. gemmiparus) and Taxonomic Ramifications for subsection Pusilli (Potamogetonaceae)	Systematic Botany	34	4	643-651	10.1600/036364409790139727			Potamogeton is a taxonomically problematic genus of aquatic monocotyledons, which has received limited phylogenetic study using molecular data. The group is known for extensive vegetative plasticity, confusing patterns of morphological variation and propensity for hybridization. Potamogeton gemmiparus and P. vaseyi are of conservation concern in North America where both are listed as imperiled. These vegetatively similar species are particularly difficult to distinguish in the absence of floating leaves. We studied both species and putatively related taxa in subsection Pusilli (e.g., P. clystocarpus, P. foliosus, P. pusillus) to elucidate relationships and to develop an identification method using molecular markers. Phylogenetic analyses of nrITS and trnK 5â intron sequence data clearly endorse the recognition of P. gemmiparus and P. vaseyi as distinct species but call into question the subspecific circumscription of P. pusillus currently followed in North America. Our data resolved P. pusillus in a clade with P. foliosus, separated substantially from P. berchtoldii (= P. pusillus subsp. tenuissimus), thus supporting the recognition of P. berchtoldii as a distinct species. Using molecular cloning techniques, we documented three clear examples of interspecific hybridization (P. foliosus ï ´ P. pusillus; P. berchtoldii ï ´ P. vaseyi; P. gemmiparus ï ´ P. vaseyi). Simple DNA polymorphisms also indicated several P. berchtoldii ï ´ P. gemmiparus hybrids. The narrowly distributed P. gemmiparus and P. clystocarpus are similar morphologically and genetically to the wide-ranging P. berchtoldii, with which they both hybridize. We recommend either the recognition of P. gemmiparus and P. clystocarpus either as distinct species, or more suitably as subspecies of P. berchtoldii, for which two new combinations are provided: P. berchtoldii subsp. gemmiparus and P. berchtoldii subsp. clystocarpus.
S2435	H. K. Moon;S. P. Hong;E. Smets;S. Huysmans	2009	Micromorphology and character evolution of nutlets in tribe Mentheae (Nepetoideae, Lamiaceae)	Systematic Botany	34	4	760-776	10.1600/036364409790139592			Mentheae is an economically important tribe in Lamiaceae with many ornamentals and culinary herbs. Although its monophyly is well supported by molecular data, the subtribal delimitation and the intergeneric relationships are still poorly understood. The nutlet morphology (SEM) of the tribe and the presence/absence of myxocarpy is documented here for 57 out of 65 genera in order to assess the systematic value of nutlet characters and to evaluate the existing molecular phylogenies for this group. Significant variation was found in nutlet shape, morphology of the abscission scar, distribution of trichomes, and surface sculpture. Five different surface types are recognized in Mentheae based on differences in cell outline, anticlinal walls, cell boundary relief and curvature of the outer periclinal wall. Representative nutlet features proved to be phylogenetically informative in Mentheae mainly at the generic level. Cladistic analyses were performed based on 15 morphological nutlet characters and/or available molecular data (nuclear ribosomal ITS and chloroplast trnL-trnF spacer sequences). The resulting topologies indicate that the addition of nutlet characters to the DNA-data matrix improved the overall resolution and also increased bootstrap support values in comparison with exclusively molecular phylogenetic analyses. The evolution of major nutlet characters within the tribe Mentheae is discussed.
S2349	N. O'Leary;Y.-W. Yuan;M. A. Chemisquy;R. G. Olmstead	2009	Reassignment of species of paraphyletic Junellia s.l. to the new genus Mulguraea (Verbenaceae) and new circumscription of genus Junellia: molecular and morphological congruence	Systematic Botany	34	4	777-786	10.1600/036364409790139691			Verbenaceae tribe Verbeneae includes three major genera, Verbena, Glandularia, and Junellia, which form a recently diversified group. Junellia is a South American genus, whereas Verbena and Glandularia are distributed in temperate regions of both South and North America. Seven non-coding chloroplast regions were sequenced, these include intergenic spacers and/or introns in trnD-trnT, trnS-trnG, trnS-trnfM, trnT-trnL, trnG, trnL, and trnL-trnF; and the nuclear ITS and ETS regions also were sequenced. Together with previous studies, these results suggest that Junellia, as traditionally conceived, is paraphyletic and forms two clades that are ancestral to Verbena and Glandularia. Junellia should be restricted to the clade containing the type, J. micrantha, which also includes Glandularia subgenus Paraglandularia and the genus Urbania. Consequently Urbania and Glandularia subgenus Paraglandularia are reduced to synonymy under Junellia, and eight new combinations in Junellia are proposed: Junellia ballsii, J. crithmifolia, J. fasciculata, J. hookeriana, J. lucanensis, J. occulta, J. pappigera and J. origenes. The remaining Junellia species form a monophyletic group here designated as the new genus Mulguraea, with 13 new combinations: Mulguraea arequipense, M. asparagoides, M. aspera var. aspera, M. aspera var. longidentata, M. cedroides, M. cinerascens, M. echegarayi, M. hystrix, M. ligustrina var. ligustrina, M. ligustrina var. lorentzii, M. scoparia, M. tetragonocalyx and M. tridens. Verbena and Glandularia s.s. are both monophyletic, relationships within each genus are extremely difficult to resolve, nevertheless there is evidence that South and North American Verbena might both be monophyletic. Verbena and Glandularia are sister groups, and together they are sister to the reconstituted Junellia. Mulguraea is sister to the group comprising all the three genera, Verbena, Glandularia, and Junellia.
S2280	C. T. Philbrick;C. P. Bove;T. C. Edson	2009	Monograph of Castelnavia (Podostemaceae)	Systematic Botany	34	4	715-729	10.1600/036364409790139781			A monograph of Castelnavia is presented. Phylogenetic analyses of morphological characters reveal eight non-homoplasious synapomorphies supporting the monophyly of the genus: absence of roots, ovary surrounded by stem tissue during and after anthesis, ovary horizontal at anthesis, unilocular mature ovary, asymmetrically inflated pedicel apex, anisolobous ovary, ovary longitudinal axis at 45-90° angle relative to pedicel axis, and one deciduous capsule valve. Five species and two forms are recognized: Castelnavia fluitans, C. monandra, C. multipartita (C. m. forma multipartita, C. m. forma pendulosa C.T. Philbrick & C.P. Bove), C. noveloi, and C. princeps. Four species accepted by earlier authors are placed in synonymy. The morphology and ecology of the genus is discussed, and species descriptions, illustrations, a distribution map, lists of specimens examined, and a key to species are presented. Castelnavia occurs primarily in Brazil with one species in Bolivia. Greatest species diversity is in the Brazilian states of Mato Grosso, Pará and Tocantins.
S2287	S. M. Sede;F. O. Zuloaga;O. Morrone	2009	Phylogenetic Studies in the Paniceae (Poaceae-Panicoideae): Ocellochloa, a new genus from the New World	Systematic Botany	34	4	684-692	10.1600/036364409790139655			The present contribution continues a critical revision of Panicum, particularly with the delimitation of "incertae sedis" taxa of the genus. A phylogenetic analysis of the Paniceae based on chloroplast sequence data (ndhF) was performed with special emphasis on section Stolonifera of Panicum. Fourteen sequences of species of sect. Stolonifera and Echinolaena were added to a panicoid grass matrix previously published giving a total of 140 sequences. As a result, Ocellochloa is here described as a new genus including 12 new combinations: O. andreana, O. biglandularis, O. brachystachya, O. chapadensis, O. craterifera, O. irregularis, O. latissima, O. piauiensis, O. pulchella, O. rudis, O. soderstromii, and O. stolonifera. The position of Panicum venezuelae, previously placed in section Stolonifera of Panicum with the above mentioned species, clearly indicates that this species is not closely related to the Ocellochloa clade. This conclusion is supported by several morphological characters, such as the presence of axillary inflorescences, cleistogamous spikelets and glands of the upper lemma depressed, not crateriform. Ocellochloa differs from Panicum s.s. by the unilateral spikelet disposition, the smooth surface of the upper anthecium, and a C3 photosynthetic pathway. This new genus is described and compared with other allied genera of the Paniceae.
S2305	N. P. Tippery;D. H. Les;J. C. J. Regalado;L. V. Averyanov;N. L. Vu;P. H. Raven	2009	Transfer of Villarsia cambodiana to Nymphoides (Menyanthaceae)	Systematic Botany	34	4	818-823	10.1600/036364409790139673			Specimens of Villarsia cambodiana, the only described tropical Villarsia species, were collected from Vietnam, where the species previously had not been recorded to occur. Phylogenetic analysis of molecular and morphological data resolved V. cambodiana within a strongly supported clade of Nymphoides species. In retrospect, we also find that the morphological characteristics of this taxon are more consistent with those of Nymphoides than of Villarsia. Thus we recommend the transfer of V. cambodiana to Nymphoides and provide the appropriate new taxonomic combination Nymphoides cambodiana (Hance) Tippery.
S2390	M. Fishbein;S. R. Kephart;M. Wilder;K. M. Halpin;S. L. Datwyler	2010	Phylogeny of Camassia (Agavaceae) Inferred from Plastid rpl16 Intron and trnD-trnY-trnE-trnT Intergenic Spacer DNA Sequences: Implications for Species Delimitation	Systematic Botany	35	1	77-85	10.1600/036364410790862588			Camassia is a genus of six bulb-forming species endemic to North America that have figured prominently in the culture and sustenance of native peoples. In western North America they form a conspicuous element of wet meadows and forest openings. Species and, especially, subspecies delimitations have been problematic. Further, several hypothesized phylogenetic and biogeographic scenarios for the origin and diversification of the genus remain untested. We estimated the phylogeny of Camassia using two non-coding, plastid DNA regions: rpl16 intron and trnD-trnY-trnE-trnT spacers, with the goals of evaluating 1) the delimitation of species and 2) Gould s hypotheses for the origin of species and infraspecific taxa. Maximum parsimony and Bayesian analyses provided concordant estimates of the phylogeny consistent with the monophyly of eastern American C. scilloides and western American C. howellii and C. leichtlinii. Two western American species were found to be paraphyletic C. cusickii weakly so, but C. quamash was strongly supported as paraphyletic to C. cusickii, C. scilloides and C. angusta. Our results are largely consistent with Gould s views that the genus originated in southwestern Oregon and diversified through eastern migration, and that C. scilloides and C. cusickii are derived from within C. quamash. Despite evidence that Camassia species hybridize, by sampling sympatric populations we detected only a single case of introgression of plastid haplotypes. This study provides the first molecular phylogenetic and phylogeographic context for evaluating evolutionary process and trait variation in this iconic genus of western North America.
S2533	C. D. Bell	2010	Towards a Species Level Phylogeny of Symphoricarpos (Dipsacales), Based on Nuclear and Chloroplast DNA	Systematic Botany	35	2	442-450	10.1600/036364410791638351			Although recent molecular phylogenetic studies of Dipsacales support a Caprifolieae clade containing Leycesteria, Triosteum, Symphoricarpos, and Lonicera, relationships among these taxa remains uncertain. Likewise, phylogenetic studies sampling more than just a handful of the species of Symphoricarpos has not been pursued. Here I present evidence based on both chloroplast and nuclear DNA to help resolve the phylogenetic relationships of both the Caprifolieae, as well as Symphoricarpos. For nuclear markers, I sequenced the ITS region in addition to the the geranylgeranyl reductase (GGR) gene, which appears to be present in only a single copy in Caprifolieae. Although GGR does not provide a great deal of resolution by itself, it does provide additional phylogenetically informative characters. From these data, there appears to be strong congruence between both the genomes with respect to the relationships within Symphoricarpos, statistical support for any given hypothesis is weak. These additional data do not further support or clarify our understanding about the relationships among members of the Caprifolieae, showing conflicting results between the chloroplast and nuclear genomes.
S2417	S. Buerki;P. B. Phillipson;P. P. Lowry Ii;M. W. Callmander	2010	Molecular phylogenetics and morphological evidence support recognition of Gereaua, a new endemic genus of Sapindaceae from Madagascar	Systematic Botany	35	1	172-180	10.1600/036364410790862669			A recent worldwide phylogeny of Sapindaceae inferred from nuclear and plastid DNA regions segregated the Malagasy Haplocoelum perrieri Capuron from the African Haplocoelum foliosum (Hiern) Bullock. Additional phylogenetic analyses conducted here (including material of H. inopleum Radlk., the generi-type) confirmed the result from the previous analysis and showed that maintaining a broad circumscription of Haplocoelum to include the Malagasy species would render the genus polyphyletic. In order to maintain monophyly, it is necessary to exclude H. perrieri, which we transfer to a new, monotypic genus, described here as Gereaua Buerki & Callm.. This taxon is easily distinguished from the species retained in Haplocoelum by the following morphological characters: (1) sexual dimorphic inflorescences in racemules (vs. monomorphic inflorescences in fascicule of cymes); (2) 2-locular ovary (vs. 3-locular ovary); (3) rudimentary ovary in staminate flowers (vs. ovary well developed in staminate flowers); (4) corolla with 4-5 petals (vs. apetalous); (5) glabrous anthers (vs. pubescent anthers); (6) pubescent fruit (vs. glabrous fruit). Relationships with the most-closely related genera, comprising in the Macphersonia group, are discussed in light of molecular, morphological and biogeographic evidence. A preliminary threat assessment of G. perrieri (Capuron) Buerki & Callm. using the IUCN Red List criteria indicates a status of Least Concerned.
S2384	C. M. Bush;W. S. Judd;K. A. Kron	2010	The Phylogeny of Leucothoë s. l. (Ericaceae: Vaccinioideae) Based on Morphological and Molecular (ndhF, matK, and nrITS) Data	Systematic Botany	35	1	201-206	10.1600/036364410790862443			Leucothoe s.l. has been split into as many as three genera in current taxonomic work involving morphological data. In this paper, phylogenetic relationships within the Leucothoe s.l. were examined using DNA sequence from matK, ndhF, nrITS, and morphological characters. The results indicate that Leucothoe s.l. species are distributed between two clades. Leucothoe racemosa and L. recurva are stongly supported as being sister taxa and are in turn sister to Chamaedaphne calyculata. These two Leucothoe species are deciduous and they exhibit "L.racemosa"-type autumn inflorescences (as does Chamaedaphne). The other six Leucothoe s.l. species (L. axillaris, L. davisiae, L. fontanesiana, L. grayana, L. griffithiana, and L. keiskei) form a strongly supported clade. Leucothoe grayana, a morphologically distinct taxon, is sister to the other five species in the clade. Based on these data, it is proposed that Leucothoe s.l. should be divided into three genera: Eubotryoides (E. grayana), Eubotrys (E. racemosa and E. recurva) and Leucothoe s.s. (L. axillaris, L. davisiae, L. fontanesiana, L. griffithiana and L. keiskei).
S2428	T. Chew;E. De Luna;D. Gonzalez	2010	Phylogenetic Relationships of the Pseudobulbous Tillandsia species (Bromeliaceae) Inferred from Cladistic Analyses of ITS 2, 5.8S ribosomal RNA gene, and ETS Sequences	Systematic Botany	35	1	86-95	10.1600/036364410790862632			Tillandsia subgenus Tillandsia as defined by Gardner includes 269 species in five groups. Within Group I, species in the Tillandsia bulbosa complex share a remarkable synapomorphy: a pseudobulb. We sampled the 13 species of pseudobulbous Tillandsia (including T. intermedia) in addition to 18 species from the five groups of subgenus Tillandsia, and four species as outgroups to perform phylogenetic analyses of sequences from two nuclear ribosomal DNA markers (ITS 2 + 5.8S and ETS). Three combined parsimony analyses explored the effects of indels treated as missing data, 5th character states, and with the simple indel coding method. Results shows that 13 species of pseudobulbous Tillandsia are placed within a group that also includes other five non-pseudobulbous species. The pseudobulb habit is optimized as a synapomorphy for this group although with three reversals. Our analyses also show that sequence variation at ITS 2 + 5.8S and ETS provided good resolution and indels are an important source of phylogenetic information regardless of coding method. All previously used chloroplast markers (for example trnL and ndhF) have been shown to be almost invariant even among distantly related species in Tillandsia. Therefore, both nuclear markers assayed here are promising sources of sequence variation for reconstruction of phylogenetic relationships among species of Tillandsia and other Bromeliaceae.
S2445	A. H. Kennedy;L. E. Watson	2010	Species Delimitations and Phylogenetic Relationships within in the Fully Myco-heterotrophic Hexalectris (Orchidaceae)	Systematic Botany	35	1	64-76	10.1600/036364410790862489			Phylogenetic analyses were conducted using six plastid markers and the ITS from 43 accessions representing all eight currently recognized Hexalectris species with the goals of testing species circumscriptions and determining interspecific relationships. The monophyly of H. warnockii, H. grandiflora, H. brevicaulis, and H. nitida, plus the H. spicata species complex, are strongly supported. The remaining species are not monophyletic, prompting the recircumscription of H. spicata s.l. as H. spicata s.s. and H. arizonica, H. revoluta s.l. as H. revoluta s.s. and H. colemanii, and H. fallax as a synonym of H. parviflora. Four major morphologically distinct lineages exist within the genus: H. warnockii, H. grandiflora, H. brevicaulis, H. spicata species complex. Within the latter, only H. spicata s.s. and H. nitida are strongly supported as sister species among all trees and the positions of H. revoluta s.s. and H. parviflora remain unresolved due to incongruence in the plastid trees when psbA is included or excluded from analyses. Incongruence between the plastid and ITS topologies was restricted to the positions of H. colemanii and H. arizonica, which suggests that either one or both of these species are of hybrid origin or that the ITS topology has been influenced by incomplete lineage sorting.
S2323	M. L. Moody;D. H. Les	2010	Systematics of the Aquatic Angiosperm Genus Myriophyllum (Haloragaceae)	Systematic Botany	35	1	121-139	10.1600/036364410790862470			Abstract--The angiosperm genus Myriophyllum (Haloragaceae) is among the most speciose of the aquatic core eudicot genera having a cosmopolitan distribution with its center of diversity in Australia (> 36 endemics). The widespread invasive species of the genus (M. aquaticum, M. heterophyllum, and M. spicatum) have drawn attention from international natural resource managers. Myriophyllum species are notoriously difficult to identify using vegetative morphology alone, which is commonly all that is available for these highly clonal plants. The relationships among taxa have been difficult to determine with suspected parallelisms in sepal and petal loss, reduced stamen number and sex expression. A molecular phylogenetic approach was taken to examine relationships among taxa and to employ molecular markers for the reliable identification of Myriophyllum taxa. This study included &#8776;80% of the known Myriophyllum species. Both nrDNA ITS and cpDNA matK and trnK data were used to examine phylogenetic relationships among species. The nrDNA ITS data proved highly variable and could differentiate between all but one species pair examined in these analyses. These analyses also uncovered multiple cryptic species among Australian complexes. Phylogenetic results support major realignments in the subgeneric classification including the rare monotypic genus Meziella nested within Myriophyllum.
S2350	J. M. Porter;L. A. Johnson;D. Wilken	2010	Phylogenetic Systematics of Ipomopsis (Polemoniaceae): Relationships and Divergence Times Estimated from Chloroplast and Nuclear DNA sequences	Systematic Botany	35	1	181-200	10.1600/036364410790862542			The genus Ipomopsis (Polemoniaceae) encompasses about 29 species and 24 subspecies generally divided into three sections: sect. Ipomopsis, sect. Microgilia, and sect. Phloganthea. We employed maximum likelihood and Bayesian inference of DNA sequences from the nuclear ribosomal ITS region (ITS1, 5.8S ribosomal subunit, ITS2) and the chloroplast trnL-F region (trnL intron + trnL-trnF intergenic spacer) to estimate phylogenetic relationships within this genus and its placement among other genera of Polemoniaceae. The chloroplast and combined sequences provide support for the monophyly of Ipomopsis, but only if four species previously included in the genus are removed: Ipomopsis havardii, I. sonorae, Microgilia minutiflora ( = I. minutiflora), and Loeseliastrum depressum ( = I. depressa). Of the three sections, two are conditionally supported as being monophyletic. section Microgilia (with 11 species and 11 infra-specific taxa) is supported as monophyletic if I. polycladon, I. sonorae, I. depressa, and I. minutiflora (the type of the section) are removed. This clade is treated here as section Elaphocera. Section Ipomopsis is inferred to be monophyletic with the inclusion of several members of sect. Phloganthea (I. multiflora, I. pinnata, and I. polyantha). There is no support for monophyly or paraphyly of sect. Phloganthea. The Giliopsis group (I. effusa, I. guttata, and I. tenuifolia) is supported as monophyletic by both data sets, and the cp sequences place it as sister to the remainder of Ipomopsis. This clade is treated as a new section, Giliopsis. Nuclear data place Giliopsis in a clade with Ipomopsis havardii, I. sonorae, Microgilia minutiflora, Loeseliastrum depressum, Eriastrum spp., Langloisia, and Dayia grantii. Using the Eocene fossil Gilisenium hueberii to calibrate the most recent common ancestor of tribe Gilieae, we estimate that Ipomopsis has its origin 28.2 ± 0. 40 to 39.0 ± 1.14 MYA (trnL-F and ITS, respectively). Using this same relaxed clock, the node (or coalescent event) that defines the I. aggregata complex is dated at 16.2 ± 0.38 and 27.1 ± 0.83 MYA (trnL-F and ITS, respectively). The deep divergence of the I. aggregata complex suggests that reticulation, rather than lineage sorting, is the source of conflict among phylogenetic markers used to infer the placement of I. macrosiphon. Keywords-cpDNA, Ipomopsis, maximum likelihood, nrITS, nonparametric rate smoothing, Polemoniaceae.
S2402	Y. C. F. Su;T. Chaowasku;R. M. K. Saunders	2010	New species and an extended phylogeny of Pseuduvaria (Annonaceae), with a reassessment of the generic status of Oreomitra	Systematic Botany	35	1	30-39	10.1600/036364410790862533			Three new species of Pseuduvaria (Annonaceae) from Peninsular Thailand and Peninsular Malaysia are described and named as P. fragrans, P. gardneri, and P. glossopetala. A recent molecular phylogenetic study, based on 51 species (including P. fragrans) elucidated the evolutionary relationships within the genus. The present study includes P. gardneri and P. glossopetala in the phylogenetic analyses using maximum likelihood and Bayesian inference methods, based on five chloroplast regions (psbA-trnH spacer, trnL-F, matK, rbcL, and atpB-rbcL spacer). The new nomenclatural combination Pseuduvaria phuyensis is also validated in accordance with the phylogenetic analyses which show that Craibella phuyensis and Pseuduvaria form a well-supported monophyletic clade. The new species and new nomenclature combination bring the total number of species in Pseuduvaria to 56. The taxonomic status of the enigmatic monotypic genus Oreomitra from New Guinea is furthermore evaluated, and the name shown to be synonymous with Pseuduvaria.
S2411	J. K. Triplett;L. G. Clark	2010	Phylogeny of the temperate bamboos (Poaceae: Bambusoideae: Bambuseae) with an emphasis on Arundinaria and allies	Systematic Botany	35	1	102-120	10.1600/036364410790862678			The temperate bamboos are a morphologically diverse grass lineage with a complex and problematic taxonomy. We present the first robust multi-locus chloroplast phylogeny of the temperate bamboos, assess relationships among key genera with an emphasis on Arundinaria and its allies, and highlight the potential role of hybridization and reticulate evolution in this group. Utilizing a total of twelve plastid DNA regions (1 gene, 10 intergenic spacers, and 1 intron), the temperate clade was resolved to include six major lineages: Bergbamboes, the African alpine bamboos, Chimonocalamus, the Shibataea clade, the Phyllostachys clade, and the Arundinaria clade. Internal resolution varied among these six, in part reflecting sampling density and in part due to apparent evolutionary rate heterogeneity. The recovered phylogeny is largely incongruent with morphological classifications, rendering subtribes and many genera paraphyletic or polyphyletic. Some associations are consistent with existing hypotheses of intergeneric hybridization, while others may indicate convergent evolution, lineage sorting, or previously unsuspected cases of hybridization. Several robust lineages were identified within the Arundinaria clade, including the Medake subclade (Pleioblastus sensu stricto and allies), Sasa sensu stricto, Sasamorpha, and the Sinicae subclade (comprising a subset of Chinese taxa currently classified in Acidosasa, Indosasa, Pleioblastus sect. Amari, and Pseudosasa subg. Sinicae). Our analyses also recovered a monophyletic Arundinaria sensu stricto of North America, and revealed substantial divergence between A. gigantea and A. tecta.
S2383	B. W. van Ee;P. E. Berry	2010	Taxonomy and Phylogeny of Croton section Heptallon (Euphorbiaceae)	Systematic Botany	35	1	151-167	10.1600/036364410790862461			A taxonomic key, synonymy, and a molecular phylogeny of the nine species and three varieties of Croton section Heptallon (Euphorbiaceae) are presented. Section Angelandra is synonymized with section Heptallon, and the species from outside of North America that had been placed into these two sections are shown to belong in other clades within the genus. As circumscribed here section Heptallon is a well-supported clade of annual herbs and subshrubs that ranges from central Mexico to the eastern United States. A new combination, Croton heptalon, is made. Lectotypes are designated for C. corymbulosus, C. elliottii, C. ellipticus, C. engelmannii var. albinoides, C. eutrigynus, C. heptalon, and C. leucophyllus var. trisepalis.
S2391	L. B. Zhang;H. He	2010	Polystichum speluncicola sp. nov. (sect. Haplopolystichum, Dryopteridaceae) based on morphological, palynological, and molecular evidence with reference to the non-monophyly of Cyrtogonellum	Systematic Botany	35	1	13-19	10.1600/036364410790862605			A new fern species, Polystichum speluncicola (sect. Haplopolystichum, Dryopteridaceae), is described from a karst cave in southern Guizhou, China. The new species has deltoid-ovate pinnae and subulate microscales with dilated base on abaxial lamina surface (broad-type microscales), characters unknown for any other members of sect. Haplopolystichum. Additionally, the new species has a few other distinctive morphological features. It has oblanceolate lamina and its pinnae are repand on margin, obtuse at apex, with acroscopic base round and basiscopic base attached at 20 60-degree angles to rachis, subcoriaceous, illustrous adaxially, densely arranged, and strongly reflexed and contracted towards lamina base. Palynologically, P. speluncicola has cristate sculpture with numerous spinules on its perispore. A preliminary phylogenetic analysis based on the DNA sequences of the trnL-F intergenic spacer showed that P. speluncicola, together with P. subacutidens, P. yuanum , and species of Cyrtomium subser. Balansana, formed an unresolved polytomy. Polystichum speluncicola can easily be distinguished morphologically from these three species by having broad-type microscales, deltoid-ovate pinnae, and much fewer pairs of pinnae per lamina. Our phylogenetic analysis resolved the genus Cyrtogonellum as paraphyletic in relation to Polystichum sect. Haplopolystichum s.l.
S2431	J. S. Zhong;J. Li;L. Li;J. G. Conran;H. W. Li	2010	Phylogeny of Isodon (Schrad. ex Benth.) Spach (Lamiaceae) and related genera inferred from nuclear ribosomal ITS, trnL-trnF region and rps16 Intron sequences and morphology	Systematic Botany	35	1	207-219	10.1600/036364410790862614			Phylogenetic analyses of the genus Isodon and related genera using the nuclear ribosomal internal transcribed spacer (nrITS), chloroplast DNA regions (trnL-trnF region and rps16 intron), and morphological data were presented. The results clarified the relationships among Isodon and its putative related genera and the question of the monophyly of Isodon and its relationship with Siphocranion. Siphocranion is a monophyletic genus and the sister clade to the remaining species of tribe Ocimeae, whereas Isodon, as currently circumscribed, is only monophyletic by including Skapanthus oreophilus. Isodon forms a distinct subtribe Isodoninae within tribe Ocimeae and three strongly supported subclades are identified within the genus. In addition, a close relationship between Hanceola and Hyptis is indicated in the combined nrITS + cpDNA data set with Bayesian inference and this is also supported in morphological analyses, however, more studies are needed to confirm this relationship. It is evident that subtribe Hanceolinae is polyphyletic as currently defined, as a result subtribe Hanceolinae is maintained and restricted to accommodate Hanceola alone. The relationships between Isodon and other genera within tribe Ocimeae are still unresolved, with the newly erected subtribe Isodoninae is monophyletic group representing a distinct lineage in subtribe Ociminae; in addition, the relationships among the species under the largest subclade C of Isodon are still poorly known. Additional studies of this group with additional data and more intensive taxon sampling might help to resolve these issues.
S2535	J. B. Beck;M. D. Windham;G. Yastkievych;K. M. Pryer	2010	A Diploids-First Approach to Species Delimitation and Interpreting Polyploid Evolution in the Fern Genus Astrolepis (Pteridaceae)	Systematic Botany	35	2	223-234	10.1600/036364410791638388			Polyploidy presents a challenge to those wishing to delimit the species within a group and reconstruct the phylogenetic relationships among these taxa. A clear understanding of the tree-like relationships among the diploid species can provide a framework upon which to reconstruct the reticulate events that gave rise to the polyploid lineages. In this study we apply this diploids-first strategy to the fern genus Astrolepis (Pteridaceae). Diploids are identified using the number of spores per sporangium and spore size. Analyses of plastid and low-copy nuclear sequence data provide well-supported estimates of phylogenetic relationships, including strong evidence for two morphologically distinctive diploid lineages not recognized in recent treatments. One of these corresponds to the type of Notholaena deltoidea, a species that has not been recognized in any modern treatment of Astrolepis. This species is resurrected here as the new combination Astrolepis deltoidea. The second novel lineage is that of a diploid initially hypothesized to exist by molecular and morphological characteristics of several established Astrolepis allopolyploids. This previously missing diploid species is described here as Astrolepis obscura.
S2501	J. M. Coughenour;M. P. Simmons;J. A. Lombardi;J. J. Cappa	2010	Phylogeny of Celastraceae subfamily Salacioideae and tribe Lophopetaleae Inferred from Morphological Characters and Nuclear and Plastid Genes	Systematic Botany	35	2	358-367	10.1600/036364410791638289			The phylogeny of Celastraceae subfamily Salacioideae (~265 species in the Old and New World tropics) and tribe Lophopetaleae (~29 species in southern Asia and the Austral-Pacific) was inferred using morphological characters together with plastid (matK, trnL-F) and nuclear (ITS and 26S rDNA) genes. Brassiantha, a monotypic genus endemic to New Guinea, is inferred to be more closely related to the clade of Dicarpellum (New Caledonia) and Hypsophila (Queensland, Australia) than it is to Hippocrateoideae or Salacioideae. This unambiguously supported resolution indicates that having a nectary disk positioned outside the stamens has been convergently derived in these two lineages. The clade of Kokoona and Lophopetalum is resolved as more closely related to Brexia and Elaeodendron that it is to Hippocrateoideae or Salacioideae. Sarawakodendron, a monotypic genus endemic to Borneo, is resolved as sister to Salacioideae. Salacioideae are inferred to have an Old World origin that was followed by a single successful radiation within Central and South America. We infer that capsular fruits are primitive within the clade of Hippocrateoideae + Sarawakodendron + Salacioideae, with berries being a synapomorphy for Salacioideae. Based on the resolution of Sarawakodendron as sister to Salacioideae, we hypothesize that the filaments of Sarawakodendron arils are homologous to the spiral filaments in the mucilagenous pulp of Salacioideae.
S2527	T. Ohi-Toma;S. Wu;S. R. Yadav;H. Murata;J. Murata	2010	Molecular Phylogeny of Typhonium sensu lato and Its Allied Genera in the Tribe Areae of the Subfamily Aroideae (Araceae) Based on Sequences of Six Chloroplast Regions	Systematic Botany	35	2	244-251	10.1600/036364410791638315			Typhonium was recognized as a monophyletic genus in the tribe Areae of the subfamily Aroideae (Araceae) until a recent molecular phylogenetic study indicated that the genus was paraphyletic respective to other Areae genera. However, that phylogenetic study did not discuss the details of infrageneric relationships due to the limited numbers of Typhonium samples. To elucidate the phylogenetic relationships in Typhonium sensu lato, we conducted phylogenetic analyses based on the combined DNA sequences of six chloroplast regions (3&#12457;trnL-trnF, rpl20-5&#12457;rps12, psbB-psbH, trnG intron, rpoC2-rps2, and trnK 3&#12457;intron) from 18 representative Typhonium species and additional samples from related genera. The resultant tree strongly suggests that Typhonium is not a monophyletic group and that it comprises at least two separate lineages, with other Areae genera nested within, and that Typhonium sensu lato may be subdivided into several monophyletic groups. These groups are distinguishable based on the stem-type of shoot organization as well as other morphological characters, which mostly correspond to traditionally recognized taxa. Based on molecular phylogeny and morphology, we proposed a revision of the Areae, wherein Typhonium sensu lato is divided into four genera: Typhonium sensu stricto, Sauromatum, and three new genera, Diversiarum, Hirsutiarum, Pedatyphonium, which are described here.
S2497	E. H. Roalson;C. E. Hinchliff;R. Trevisan;C. R. M. da Silva	2010	Phylogenetic relationships in Eleocharis (Cyperaceae): C4 photosynthesis origins and patterns of diversification in the spikerushes	Systematic Botany	35	2	257-271	10.1600/036364410791638270			Eleocharis (Cyperaceae) is a morphologically and physiologically diverse lineage of 250+ species with a cosmopolitan distribution. We here explore phylogenetic relationships in this lineage using maximum parsimony and Bayesian inference analyses of nrDNA ITS and cpDNA trnC-ycf6 and ycf6-psbM sequence data with the goals of comparing our phylogenetic hypotheses to previous classifications, morphological variation, and photosynthetic pathway variation. Our results suggest that C4 photosynthesis has been derived at least three times, with several cases of possible reversion to C3-like or intermediate pathways and several additional origins of C3-C4 intermediate photosynthetic pathways, as inferred by carbon isotope ratio measurements. Many classification units currently recognized are not monophyletic, however, subgenus Limnochloa and subgenus Scirpidium are monophyletic. Other classification units largely corresponding to clades include subgenus Zinserlingia, subseries Chaetariae, and series Maculosae. Problems with species circumscription and morphological variation in several groups are discussed in light of the phylogeny, particularly in the context of species membership of seven focal clades found in the analyses.
S2493	D. C. Tank;M. J. Donoghue	2010	Phylogeny and phylogenetic nomenclature of the Campanulidae based on an expanded set of genes and taxa	Systematic Botany	35	2	425-441	10.1600/036364410791638306			Previous attempts to resolve relationships among the primary lineages of Campanulidae (e.g., Apilaes, Asterales, Dipsacales) have mostly been unconvincing, and the placement of a number of smaller groups (e.g., Bruniaceae, Columelliaceae, Escalloniaceae) remains uncertain. Here we build on a recent analysis of an incomplete data set that was assembled from the literature for a set of 50 campanulid taxa. To this data set we first added newly generated DNA sequence data for the same set of genes and taxa. Second, we sequenced three additional cpDNA coding regions (ca. 8000 bp) for the same set of 50 campanulid taxa. Finally, we assembled the most comprehensive sample of campanulid diversity to date, including ca. 17,000 bp of cpDNA for 122 campanulid taxa and five outgroups. Simply filling in missing data in the 50-taxon data set (rendering it 94% complete) resulted in a topology that was very similar to earlier studies, but with little additional resolution or confidence. In contrast, the addition of the ca. 8000 bp of sequence data provided resolution and support for a number of relationships. With the addition of many more campnaulid taxa we recovered a well-resolved phylogeny for Campanulidae where, with the exception of the placement of Escalloniaceae, support was high for all major clades. In addition, we were able to confidently place a number of enigmatic taxa, some whose relationships were previously unresolved and some never before included. In light of these results, we briefly expand the discussion of floral symmetry and provide a phylogenetic classification of Campanulidae with phylogenetic definitions for all of the well-supported major clades.
S2483	M. Weigend;M. Gottschling;F. Selvi;H. H. Hilger	2010	Fossil and extant Western Hemisphere Boragineae, and the polyphyly of Trigonotideae Riedl (Boraginaceae: Boraginoideae)	Systematic Botany	35	2	409-419	10.1600/036364410791638423			Boraginaceae tribe Trigonotideae comprises a heterogenous assemblage of taxa, many of which have been shown to belong to widely divergent lineages in Boraginaceae in the recent past, with some taxa now assigned to three of the four currently recognized tribes of the Boraginaceae sensu stricto, namely the Cynoglosseae, Echiochileae, and Lithospermeae. The systematics of Moritzia and Thaumatocaryon, the only endemic South American genera of Boraginaceae, have been controversially discussed in the past, and their most recent placementwas in Trigonotideae. The present study investigates the phylogenetic relationships of Trigonotideae based on micromorphology and molecular data (ITS including 5.8S rRNA, trnL-trnF spacer). Molecular data show that Trigonotideae are polyphyletic, and none of its members is at all closely related to Trigonotis itself. Moritzia and Thaumatocaryon are closely allied to each other and are the sister group of the Old World Boragineae. Flowers, pollen, and fruit morphology strongly support this systematic placement. Extant (native) Boragineae are absent from North America and had not previously been reported from South America, whereas members of the Cynoglosseae, Echiochileae, and Lithospermeae have been reported from both continents. Moritzia and Thaumatocaryon are thus the only native representatives of Boragineae in the Americas and represent an unexpected western Eurasian/South American disjunction. However, several (widespread and abundant) fossil taxa from the Cenozoic of North America (especially species of Prolithospermum) can be confidently placed into Boragineae. Extant Moritzia/Thaumatocaryon likely go back to a lineage which reached North America from Europe and then migrated into South America, with subsequent extinction in North America.
S2546	P. J. Alexander;M. D. Windham;C. D. Bailey;G. Rajanikanth;I. A. Al-Shehbaz	2010	Molecular phylogenetics and taxonomy of the genus Thysanocarpus (Brassicaceae)	Systematic Botany	35	3	559-577	10.1600/036364410792495926			The relationships and taxonomy of the genus Thysanocarpus (Brassicaceae) are reassessed based on molecular phylogenetic analyses of nuclear ribosomal (ITS) and chloroplast (trnL-F) sequences and a critical re-examination of morphology and nomenclatural types. Based on these analyses, Thysanocarpus is well-supported as a member of tribe Thelypodieae, but no illuminating phylogenetic structure is found within the tribe. The independent origin of similar fruit morphology in Thysanocarpus and Athysanus is confirmed. Within Thysanocarpus, seven species are recognized: T. conchuliferus, T. curvipes, T. desertorum, T. erectus, T. laciniatus, T. radians, and T. rigidus. Thysanocarpus laciniatus is found to have originated through hybridisation. However, T. desertorum and T. rigidus, which have previously been included within T. laciniatus (as T. laciniatus var. hitchcockii and T. laciniatus var. rigidus, respectively), do not share that speciesâ hybrid origin and are distinct both phylogenetically and morphologically. Within T. curvipes, five subspecies are recognized: T. curvipes subsp. amplectens, T. curvipes subsp. curvipes, T. curvipes subsp. elegans, T. curvipes subsp. longistylus, and T. curvipes subsp. eradiatus. Thysanocarpus curvipes subsp. elegans and T. curvipes subsp. longistylus form clades in ITS and/or trnL-F cladograms as well as showing morphological distinction. The remaining three subspecies are recognized based on a combination of morphology and geography.
S2420	J. M. Brokaw;L. Hufford	2010	Phylogeny, introgression, and character evolution of diploid species in Mentzelia section Trachyphytum (Loasaceae)	Systematic Botany	35	3	601-617	10.1600/036364410792495980			Mentzelia section Trachyphytum (Loasaceae) has 25-30 species found primarily in the western United States. Species delimitation and reconstruction of evolutionary relationships within Trachyphytum have been difficult due to restricted and continuous morphological variation. We employed phylogeny reconstructions based on morphology and DNA sequences from the plastid trnH-psbA, trnS-trnG, trnS-trnfM, ndhF-rpl32, and rpl32-trnL regions and the low-copy nuclear gene idh to investigate evolutionary relationships and patterns of hybridization and homoplasy among diploid species in Trachyphytum. Reconstructions indicated surprisingly high levels of genetic introgression among closely and distantly related diploids. Additionally, reconstructions based on molecular data showed that some morphological characters traditionally used to delineate groups exhibit homoplasy. However, both molecular and morphologically based reconstructions supported two major clades in section Trachyphytum corresponding to the subsection Trachyphyta and a subsection Affines sensu lato comprising taxa previously separated into subsections Affines and Micranthae. Further, this study strengthens assertions that characters apparently shared between the two annual sections of Mentzelia, Trachyphytum and Bicuspidaria, represent homoplasious evolution.
S2570	S. C. Meyers;A. Liston;R. Meinke	2010	A Molecular Phylogeny of Limnanthes (Limnanthaceae) and Investigation of an Anomalous Limnanthes Population from California, USA	Systematic Botany	35	3	552-558	10.1600/036364410792495854			In an effort to further resolve relationships within the genus Limnanthes and the family Limnanthaceae a phylogenetic study was conducted using one nuclear (nrITS) and two chloroplast (trnL intron and trnS-trnG intergenic spacer) genes. In addition to surveying all currently accepted taxa within Limnanthaceae, an anomalous population of 4-petalous plants from Half Moon Bay, San Mateo County, California, was also included. Further, a series of crossing experiments were performed between Half Moon Bay plants and two closely related species (Limnanthes bakeri and L. macounii). The results of this study confirm the monophyly of two sections within Limnanthes and also suggest that Limnanthaceae may contain as few as four species of Limnanthes and the monotypic genus Floerkea proserpinacoides. Additionally, the molecular phylogenetic results and crossing experiments do not support taxonomic recognition of the Half Moon Bay population, rather it is part of a highly polymorphic Limnanthes douglasii sensu lato.
S2538	M. S. Samain;S. Wanke;P. Goetghebeur	2010	Unraveling extensive paraphyly in the genus Hydrangea s.l. with implications for the systematics of tribe Hydrangeeae	Systematic Botany	35	3	593-600	10.1600/036364410792495827			Several representatives of Hydrangeaceae tribe Hydrangeeae are very popular in the horticultural trade for their inflorescences with attractive marginal flowers, resulting in many hybrids and cultivars. However, despite previous morphological and molecular studies, the phylogenetic relationships between the nine currently recognized genera in this clade are still largely unclear, and the widely used infrageneric classification of the genus Hydrangea. by McClintock (which was mainly based on the study of herbarium specimens) requires critical reevaluation. We present a partially well resolved and well supported phylogeny of the tribe Hydrangeeae based on maximum parsimony and Bayesian analyses of multiple coding and non-coding chloroplast regions (rps16-trnK spacer, trnK intron, trnK exon, matK gene and trnK-psbA spacer). All genera, sections and subsections were included making it a highly representative sampling for the tribe Hydrangeeae. Hydrangea is paraphyletic with respect to the eight other genera of Hydrangeeae, requiring a classification update. The subsections Heteromallae and Petalanthe of section Hydrangea are monophyletic, the subsections Americanae, Asperae and Macrophyllae are poly- resp. paraphyletic. Of the two subsections of section Cornidia, one, Monosegia, is paraphyletic whereas the other, Polysegia, is monophyletic. The necessary nomenclatural changes based on these results might have a certain effect in the trade but also might encourage breeders to produce intergeneric hybrids between traditionally recognized genera in Hydrangeeae.
S2347	N. J. C. Zerega;T. J. Motley;N. Supardi	2010	Phylogeny and recircumscription of Artocarpeae (Moraceae) with a focus on Artocarpus	Systematic Botany	35	4	766-782	10.1600/036364410X539853			Moraceae is a large (~1050 species) primarily tropical family with several economically and ecologically important species. While its monophyly has been well supported in recent studies, relationships within the family at the tribal level and below remain unresolved. Delimitation of the tribe Artocarpeae has been particularly difficult. Classifications based on morphology differ from those based on phylogenetic studies, and all treatments include highly heterogeneous assemblages of genera that seem to represent a cross section of the family. We evaluated chloroplast and nuclear DNA sequence data for 60 Moraceae taxa representing all of the genera that have been included in past treatments of Artocarpeae and also included species from all other Moraceae tribes and closely related families as outgroups. The data were analyzed using maximum parsimony and maximum likelihood methods and indicate that none of the past treatments of Artocarpeae represent a monophyletic lineage. We present the most complete phylogenetic hypothesis for Artocarpeae and the genus Artocarpus to date. The phylogenetic reconstructions are used to discuss inflorescence evolution and pollination in the tribe and to produce a revised treatment of the tribe and subgenera of Artocarpus.
S2319	Z. Zhang;J. Li	2010	Conflicting Phylogenies of Section Macrantha (Acer, Aceroideae, Sapindaceae) Based on Chloroplast and Nuclear DNA	Systematic Botany	35	4	801-810	10.1600/036364410X539871			Section Macrantha is a monophyletic group with 18 species, all of which are distributed in Asia except for Acer pensylvanicum in eastern North America. Nuclear sequences from nrDNA ITS, LEAFY, and GBSSI (two copies), along with morphological characters, recognize two clades (series Crataegifolia and Micrantha). However, chloroplast phylogenies based on ndhF, trnL-F, and psbA-trnH are significantly incongruent with the nuclear trees and show two major clades with species from Asian continent minus the northeast (AS-N) in one clade and those from Asian Pacific Islands plus the northeast Asia (PINAS) in the other. Ancient hybridization and chloroplast capture may have occurred across the species boundaries of the two series in both geographic areas. The two series diverged at 46.3 mya, which is before the formation of the Japanese Sea in the early Miocene (32-18 mya). The Japanese Sea may be the barrier for the seed exchange between the two geographic areas, and was responsible for the formation of the disjunct distribution of section Macrantha between the AS-N and PINAS areas, and between eastern Asia and North America.
S756	A. Beyra-Matos;M. Lavin	1999	A monograph of Pictetia (Papilionoideae; Leguminosae) and a review of the tribe Aeschynomeneae	Systematic Botany Monographs	56		1-93		http://www.jstor.org/stable/25096650		The genera Pictetia (traditionally with four to eight species) and Belairia (traditionally with six) are combined into a single genus, Pictetia, that now includes eight species confined to the Greater Antilles. Pictetia is diagnosed by pods that have a distinctly two-nerved placental margin, leaves of the long shoots subtended by persistent to caducous spinescent stipules, and coriaceous leaflets that usually have spinescent mucros. These morphological synapomorphic characters, as well as ones derived from the analysis of DNA sequence data from 5.8S and flanking internal transcribed spacers, support the hypothesis of monophyly for the genus. All species except P. spinifolia are confined to a single island or island system, either the eastern half of Cuba, Hispaniola (though not including the southwestern peninsula), or Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands excluding St. Croix. Pictetia spinifolia occurs on central Hispaniola and eastern Cuba, and its restricted morphological variation in Cuba is suggestive of a relatively recent occurrence there. The historical biogeographic pattern of Pictetia supports a close area relationship among eastern Cuba, central Hispaniola, and Puerto Rico, which is consistent with Rosen's Caribbean vicariance model. Phylogenetically, Pictetia occupies a pivotal position within the aeschynomenoid legumes. It has been classified in the subtribe Ormocarpinae, which is shown here to be paraphyletic with respect to other aeschynomenoid genera. Among the genera of Ormocarpinae, Pictetia is most closely related to the African-Asian genus Ormocarpum, the Madagascan Ormocarpopsis, and the Meso-American Diphysa. These four genera represent one of the earliest branching clades within the aeschynomenoid radiation, according to analysis of non-molecular data. Combined and separate analyses of molecular and non-molecular data suggest that a clade comprising Ormocarpum and Ormocarpopsis is sister to Pictetia, whereas Diphysa represents the earliest branching lineage within this clade of four genera. This geographical relationship of Meso-America and the Greater Antilles, with paleotropical Africa, Asia, and Madagascar is thought to be relictual from a Tertiary boreotropic distribution. Phylogenetic analysis reveals that the eight species of Pictetia are not conveniently grouped into infrageneric taxa because the traditionally recognized series Racemosa (with P. aculeata and P. obcordata) and Fasciculatae (with P. spinifolia and P. marginata), are paraphyletic with respect to the formerly recognized genus Belairia.
S423	J. B. Whitfield	1992	The polyphyletic origin of endoparasitism in the cyclostome lineages of Braconidae (Hymenoptera)	Systematic Entomology	17		273-286				The evolution of endoparasitism in braconid wasps is demonstrably polyphyletic, not only within the family as a whole but even within the rogadine/exothecine assemblage of genera. A cladistic analysis of rogadine and exothecine genera, coupled with an optimization approach to estimating ancestral character states, is used to analyze the evolution of various aspects of endoparasitism within this assemblage. At least two independent origins of endoparasitism are hypothesized - one in the Rogadini and the other in an assmeblage including the Gnaptodontinae, Opiinae and Alysiinae. Phylogenetic analyes and hypotheses can be useful not only in interpreting evolutionary trends, but in guiding and providing insights into more general comparative behavioural and physiological studies of parasitism.
S399	R. D. M. Page;R. D. Price;R. A. Hellenthal	1995	Phylogeny of Geomydoecus and Thomomydoecus pocket gopher lice (Phthiraptera:Trichodectidae) inferred from cladistic analysis of adult and first instar morphology	Systematic Entomology	20	2	129-143	10.1111/j.1365-3113.1995.tb00087.x			The phylogeny for all 122 species and subspecies of chewing lice of the genera Geomydoecus and Thomomydoecus (Phthiraptera: Trichodectidae) hosted by pocket gophers (Rodentia: Geomyidae) is estimated by a cladistic analysis of fifty-eight morphological characters obtained from adults and first instars. The data set has considerable homoplasy, but still contains phylogenetic information. The phylogeny obtained is moderately resolved and, with some notable exceptions, supports the species complexes proposed by Hellenthal and Price over the the last two decades. The subgenera G. (Thaelerius) and T. (Thomomydoecus) are both shown to be monophyletic, but the monophly of subgenus T. (Jamespattonius) could not be confirmed, perhaps due to the lack of first-instar data for one of its component species. The nominate subgenus of Geomydoecus may be monophyletic, but our cladogram was insufficiently resolved to corroborate this. Mapping the pocket gopher hosts onto the phylogeny reveals a consistent pattern of louse clades being restncted to particular genera or subgenera of gophers, but the history of the host-parasite association appears complex and will require considerable effort to resolve.
S1515	J. Liljeblad;F. Ronquist	1998	A phylogenetic analysis of higher-level gall wasps relationships (Hymenoptera: Cynipidae)	Systematic Entomology	28	3	229-252	10.1046/j.1365-3113.1998.00053.x			We present the most comprehensive analysis of higher-level relationships in gall wasps conducted thus far. The analysis was based on detailed study of the skeletal morphology of adults, resulting in 164 phylogenetically informative characters, complemented with a few biological characters. Thirty-seven cynipid species from thirty-one genera, including four genera of the apparently monophyletic Cynipini and almost all of the genera in the other tribes, were examined. The outgroup included exemplar species from three successively more distant cynipoid families: Figitidae (the sister group of the Cynipidae), Liopteridae and Ibaliidae. There was considerable homoplasy in the data, but many groupings in the shortest tree were nonetheless well supported, as indicated by bootstrap proportions and decay indices. Partitioning of the data suggested that the high level of homoplasy is characteristic of the Cynipidae and not the result of the amount of available phylogenetically conservative characters being exhausted. The analysis supported the monophyly of the Cynipini (oak gall wasps) which, together with the Rhoditini (the rose gall wasps), Eschatocerini and Pediaspidini formed a larger monophyletic group of gall inducers restricted to woody representatives of the eudicot subclass Rosidae. The inquilines (Synergini) were indicated to be monophyletic, whereas the Aylacini, primarily herb gall inducers, appeared as a paraphyletic assemblage of basal cynipid groups. The shortest tree suggests that the Cynipidae can be divided into three major lineages: one including the inquilines, the Aylacini genera associated with Rosaceae, and Liposthenes; one consisting entirely of Aylacini genera, among them Aulacidea, Isocolus and Neaylax; and one comprising the woody rosid gallers (the oak and rose gall wasps and allies), the Phanacis-Timaspis complex and the Aylacini genera associated with Papaveraceae.
S358	V. S. Smith	1999	Basal ischnoceran louse phylogeny (Phthiraptera: Ischnocera: Goniodidae and Heptapsogasteridae)	Systematic Entomology	25	1	73-94	10.1046/j.1365-3113.2000.00095.x			A phylogenetic analysis of generic relationships for avian chewing lice of the families Goniodidae and Heptapsogasteridae (Phthiraptera: Ischnocera) is presented. These lice, hosted by galliform, columbiform and tinamiform birds are reputedly basal in the phylogeny of Ischnocera. A cladistic analysis of sixty-two adult morphological characters from thirty-one taxa revealed thirty equally parsimonious trees. The phylogeny is well resolved within the Heptapsogasteridae and supports the monophyly of the subfamily Strongylocotinae (sensu Eichler, 1963). Resolution within the Goniodidae is lower but suggests that the genera hosted by Columbiformes are largely monophyletic. Mapping host taxonomy on to the phylogeny of the lice reveals a consistent pattern which is largely congruent down to the rank of host family, although at lower taxonomic levels the association appears to be more complex. The inclusion of more louse taxa may considerably help to unravel the coevolutionary history of both the hosts and their parasites.
S1164	J. R. Cryan	2004	Molecular Phylogeny of Cicadomorpha (Insecta: Hemiptera: Cicadoidea, Cercopoidea, and Membracoidea): Adding Evidence to the Controversy	Systematic Entomology							The hemipteran infraorder Cicadomorpha comprises the superfamilies Cicadoidea (cicadas), Cercopoidea (spittlebugs or froghoppers), and Membracoidea (leafhoppers and treehoppers). Earlier attempts to determine relationships among these three monophyletic lineages using either morphological or molecular data suffered from insufficient sampling (taxonomic and data) and problematic tree rooting, leading to discordant results. Presented here are phylogenetic reconstructions within Cicadomorpha based on DNA nucleotide sequence data from multiple genetic markers (18S rDNA, 28S rDNA, and histone 3) sequenced from representative taxa of Cicadidae, Tettigarctidae, Cercopidae, Aphrophoridae, Clastopteridae, Machaerotidae, Epipygidae, Cicadellidae, Membracidae, Myerslopiidae, and Aetalionidae. To test the robustness of phylogenetic signal, these sequence data were analyzed separately and in combination under various alignment parameters using both manual alignment (of both attenuated and full sequences) and alignment via ClustalX. Results demonstrate clearly that, despite alignment methodology used, basing a phylogeny on a single gene region often is misleading. Analyses of the combination of data sets support the major relationships within Cicadomorpha as (Membracoidea, (Cicadoidea, Cercopoidea)). Internal relationships recovered within each superfamily shows evidence for: 1) the placement of Myerslopiidae as the sister group of the remaining Membracoidea; 2) the paraphyly of Cicadellidae; 3) the sister group relationship between Machaerotidae and Clastopteridae; 4) the monophyly of Cercopidae; 5) the diversification of Epipygidae from within the possibly paraphyletic Aphrophoridae.
S1065	J. R. Cryan;B. M. Wiegmann;L. L. Deitz;C. H. Dietrich;M. F. Whiting	2004	Treehopper Trees: Phylogeny of Membracidae (Hemiptera: Cicadomorpha: Membracoidea) Based on Molecules and Morphology	Systematic Entomology							Recent, independent phylogenetic analyses of membracid relationships based on molecular and morphological data have identified monophyletic lineages within the family; however, results of these studies have not fully resolved treehopper phylogeny, and relationships among some higher membracid lineages remain in doubt. Portions of three data sets (958 aligned nucleotides from elongation factor-1·, 2363 aligned nucleotides from 28S ribosomal DNA, and 83 morphological features of adults and nymphs) introduced in recent studies are here reanalyzed separately and in combination with two new molecular data sets (321 aligned nucleotides from wingless and 1829 aligned nucleotides from 18S rDNA). Results of combined data analyses, contrary to previous analyses of morphological data alone, grouped membracids into two well-supported lineages, one comprising Stegaspidinae and Centrotinae, the other comprising Membracinae, Darninae and Smiliinae. The analyses recovered Centrotinae, Membracinae, and Darninae as monophyletic groups, but Stegaspidinae was paraphyletic with respect to Centrotinae, and Smiliinae was polyphyletic with Micrutalini placed as sister group to the clade comprising Membracinae, Darninae, and Smiliinae. These results are consistent with the following hypotheses, proposed previously based on analysis of morphological data: 1) the posterior pronotal process was derived and lost multiple times during the evolution of Membracidae; 2) Membracidae originated in the New World and reached the Old World subsequently via dispersal; 3) maternal care evolved independently multiple times and may or may not have been preceded by the acquisition of ant-mutualism.
S1082	J. M. Heraty;D. Hawks;J. S. Kostecki;A. Carmichael	2004	Phylogeny and Behavior of the Gollumiellinae, a new subfamily of the ant-parasitic Eucharitidae (Hymenoptera: Chalcidoidea)	Systematic Entomology							Gollumiellinae is proposed as a new subfamily for the Indo-Pacific genera Gollumiella Hedqvist and Anorasema Bou?cek based on analyses of three ribosomal transcript gene regions (28S-D2 & D3 and 18S-E23; 1262 aligned bp) sequenced for 28 genera and 54 species of Eucharitidae, and 12 genera and 19 species of Pteromalidae (Pteromalinae) and Perilampidae (Chrysolampinae and Perilampinae). Gollumiella and Anorasema have been treated as either a monophyletic or paraphyletic group within the Eucharitini (Hymenoptera: Eucharitidae). Monophyly of the Eucharitidae and a sister group relationship between Gollumiellinae and Oraseminae + Eucharitinae is supported strongly in parsimony and Bayesian analyses. The molecular phylogeny contradicts previous morphological hypotheses, in which Gollumiella and Anorasema are within Eucharitini. The strength of the molecular hypothesis is explored through evaluations of data alignments that are eye-optimized, Clustal-X aligned, eye-optimized but with gaps coded as a fifth base, and eye-optimized and combined with morphological data. The oviposition behavior and host associations of Gollumiella longipetiolata on tree ferns (Cyathea latebrosa, Cyatheaceae), and the morphology of the planidium and pupa are newly described. Eggs are deposited vertically, with the base anchored into the leaf or petiolar surface. Unlike other Eucharitidae, the eggs are not stalked, but rather tipped with a secretion that may act as an attractant for their ant host, Paratrechina sp. (Formicidae: Formicinae). Various morphological character state optimizations and their implications for convergent morphology, behavior and host associations are discussed.
S888	H. J. Megens;W. J. V. Nes;C. H. M. V. Moorsel;N. E. Pierce;R. D. Jong	2004	Molecular phylogeny of the Oriental butterfly genus Arhopala (Lycaenidae, Theclinae) inferred from mitochondrial and nuclear genes	Systematic Entomology	29		115-131				Here we present a phylogeny for a selection of species of the butterfly genus Arhopala based on molecular characters. We sequenced 1778 bases of the mitochondrial genes Cytochrome Oxidase 1 and 2 including tRNALeu, and a 393 bp fragment of the nuclear wingless gene for a total of 42 specimens of 33 species, representing all major species groups. Analyses of mtDNA and wingless genes show congruent phylogenetic signal. The phylogeny presented here confirms the monophyly of the centaurus, eumolphus, camdeo and epimuta groups and the amphimuta subgroup. It confirms close relationships between species within the agelastus group, that together with amphimuta subgroup, centaurus and camdeo groups form a monophyletic group. However, incongruencies with previous taxonomic studies also occur; the amphimuta and silhetensis groups are not monophyletic, as is the genus Arhopala itself. One enigmatic species, A. kinabala, was further evaluated for topology and the support for basal placement of this species is due mainly to the wingless gene. However, in the Parsimony analysis, and subsequent Maximum Likelihood evaluations, certain nodes could not be resolved due to insufficient support. The mtDNA shows extreme AT bias with compositional heterogeneity at 3rd codon positions, which may result in saturation. In contrast, the wingless gene does not show compositional bias, suggesting that poor support is not due solely to saturation. The evaluation of morphological characters used in previous studies on Arhopala systematics on the molecular tree indicates that the macular pattern and the absence of tails at the hind wings show extensive homoplasy. A significant phylogenetic signal (as indicated by T-PTP tests) is present in several of these morphological characters, which are nevertheless of limited use in phylogenetic studies due to their labile nature.
S1131	P. S. Ward;D. A. Downie	2004	The ant subfamily Pseudomyrmecinae (Hymenoptera: Formicidae): phylogeny and evolution of big-eyed arboreal ants	Systematic Entomology							The ant subfamily Pseudomyrmecinae comprises three genera of hyperoptic, arboreal ants, widely distributed in tropical and subtropical regions: Pseudomyrmex (~200 species, New World), Myrcidris (2 species, South America) and Tetraponera (~100 species, Paleotropics). The phylogenetic relationships among these ants were investigated using DNA sequence data (~5.2 kb from 18S rDNA, 28S rDNA, wingless, abdominal-A, and long-wavelength rhodopsin genes) and 144 morphological characters, both separately and in combination. Data were gathered from a representative set of 49 pseudomyrmecine species, plus 18 species from various outgroups. There is substantial agreement among the results obtained from different data sets, and from different methods of phylogenetic inference (parsimony, Bayesian inference). Monophyly of the following groups is strongly supported (100% bootstrap support and 1.00 posterior probability in the molecular data set): Pseudomyrmecinae, Pseudomyrmex, and Pseudomyrmex + Myrcidris. The status of the genus Tetraponera is less clear: one gene (wingless) indicates strongly that the genus is paraphyletic, while the 28S gene and morphology support monophyly of this taxon. Seven of nine Pseudomyrmex species groups, established previously on the basis of morphology alone, are strongly upheld, but monophyly is rejected for the P. pallens-group and the P. viduus-group. In the latter case molecular evidence indicates the existence of two independent clades, associated with the ant-plants Triplaris and Tachigali, respectively, whose convergent morphological features had caused them to be placed erroneously in the same species group. The present results confirm an earlier assertion that obligate associations with domatia-bearing plants have arisen at least 12 times in the subfamily. Molecular and morphological data support the hypothesis of a sister group relationship between Pseudomyrmecinae and Myrmeciinae (84% parsimony bootstrap, combined data set), which implies a Cretaceous origin of the stem-group pseudomyrmecines in the southern hemisphere. Pseudomyrmecines appear to have arisen in the Paleotropics and later dispersed from Africa to South America, where they experienced a pronounced burst of diversification.
S1324	I. Agnarsson;M. Kuntner	2005	Madagascar: an unexpected hotspot of social Anelosimus spider diversity (Araneae: Theridiidae)	Systematic Entomology	30	4	577-592	10.1111/j.1365-3113.2005.00289.x			The spider genus Anelosimus Simon, 1891 (Theridiidae) currently contains over 40 described species, found worldwide in tropical to warm temperate areas. American Anelosimus are all social, a rare trait among spiders, but social behaviour has not been reported for Anelosimus species elsewhere. Old World Anelosimus are poorly known, both behaviourally and taxonomically, and no Anelosimus species have been described yet from sub-Saharan Africa, or Madagascar. Based on a preliminary phylogenetic analysis we predicted sociality in an undescribed Madagascar species because it grouped amongst social New World species. An expedition to Madagascar then found no less than five undescribed periodic-social (subsocial) Anelosimus species in Périnet reserve. A sixth species from the same locality is known from museum specimens and the Anelosimus diversity of Périnet is comparable to the most diverse single locality in the Americas. Subsocial species play a key role in understanding the evolution of semi-permanent sociality (quasisociality). This increased pool of available subsocial study species demonstrates the utility of phylogenies as predictors of traits in species thus far unstudied. Here, A. andasibe sp.n., A. may Agnarsson sp.n., A. nazariani sp.n., A. sallee sp.n., A. salut sp.n. and A. vondrona sp.n. are described. Anelosimus locketi Roberts, 1977 from Aldabra Atoll is a junior synonym of Anelosimus decaryi (Fage, 1930) comb.n. from Madagascar. Preliminary data on the behaviour of the new species is given, indicating a level of sociality similar to the American A. Œarizona‚. Phylogenetic analysis supports monophyly of the Madagascar group and places it as sister to a clade containing the eximius lineage from the Americas, and a pair of undescribed Tanzanian species.
S1587	J. E. Light;M. S. Hafner	2006	Phylogenetics and host associations of Fahrenholzia sucking lice (Phthiraptera: Anoplura)	Systematic Entomology							Mitochondrial and nuclear DNA sequence data were used to reconstruct phylogenetic relationships for 11 of the 12 currently recognized species of Fahrenholzia, which are found only on rodents of the family Heteromyidae. Field collections included 20 of the 33 known host associations and resulted in discovery of four new associations. Phylogenetic analyses of the mitochondrial and nuclear datasets were in general agreement, resulting in a well resolved Fahrenholzia phylogeny. Analyses supported monophyly of lice parasitizing the host subfamily Heteromyinae (spiny pocket mice), and lice parasitizing the genera Chaetodipus (pocket mice) and Perognathus (silky pocket mice) each represent monophyletic lineages. Phylogenetic patterns and levels of genetic differentiation suggest that the widespread species F. pinnata may contain several cryptic species. Cryptic species also may exist within the less widely distributed species, F. microcephala and F. reducta.
S1588	J. E. Light;M. S. Hafner	2006	Phylogenetics and host associations of Fahrenholzia sucking lice (Phthiraptera: Anoplura)	Systematic Entomology							Mitochondrial and nuclear DNA sequence data were used to reconstruct phylogenetic relationships for 11 of the 12 currently recognized species of Fahrenholzia, which are found only on rodents of the family Heteromyidae. Field collections included 20 of the 33 known host associations and resulted in discovery of four new associations. Phylogenetic analyses of the mitochondrial and nuclear datasets were in general agreement, resulting in a well resolved Fahrenholzia phylogeny. Analyses supported monophyly of lice parasitizing the host subfamily Heteromyinae (spiny pocket mice), and lice parasitizing the genera Chaetodipus (pocket mice) and Perognathus (silky pocket mice) each represent monophyletic lineages. Phylogenetic patterns and levels of genetic differentiation suggest that the widespread species F. pinnata may contain several cryptic species. Cryptic species also may exist within the less widely distributed species, F. microcephala and F. reducta.
S2196	M. L. Buffington	2009	Description, circumscription and phylogenetics of the new tribe Zaeucoilini (Hymenoptera: Figitidae: Eucoilinae), including a description of a new genus	Systematic Entomology	34	1	162-187	10.1111/j.1365-3113.2008.00447.x			Neotropical eucoiline genera that have been included in and allied with the Zaeucoila genus group 3 are redescribed. Following character analysis and phylogenetic reconstruction (25 taxa, 96 morphological characters, 1452 ribosomal and mitochondrial characters), this informal genus group was found to be monophyletic, and hence raised to formal recognition as a tribe of eucoilines, namely Zaeucoilini new tribe. Through phylogenetic reconstruction, Aegeseucoela Buffington was determined to be polyphyletic; the type species of Aegeseucoela, A. grenadensis (Ashmead), is transferred to Agrostocynips comb.n.; the orphaned species, A. flavotincta (Kieffer), is transferred to Marthiella Buffington gen.n., comb.n. Based on the examination of the holotype of Diranchis flavipes Ashmead, 1900, this species is transferred to Rhabdeucoela comb.n., where it is both a junior, subjective synonym of flavipes (Ashmead, 1894) syn.n. and a junior, secondary homonym. Zaeucoilini contains the following genera: Agrostocynips Diaz, Dettmeria Borgmeier, Dicerataspis Ashmead, Lopheucoila Weld, Marthiella Buffington, Moneucoela Kieffer, Moritiella Buffington, Penteucoila Weld, Preseucoela Buffington, Rhabdeucoela Kieffer, Tropideucoila Ashmead and Zaeucoila Ashmead. Characters and character states applicable specifically to Zaeucoilini are defined and illustrated. Characters supporting the monophyly of each genus are discussed. The plesiomorphic host for members of the Zaeucoilini are postulated as agromyzid leaf-mining Diptera, with one shift within the clade containing Dettmeria, Dicerataspis and Lopheucoila to fruit-infesting Diptera. New host records are reported for species of Preseucoela, Rhabdeucoela and Zaeucoila. All known hosts for the species of each genus are reported, as are known distributions and locations of type specimens.
S2326	Z. Pénzes;G. Melika;Z. Bozsóki;P. Bihari;I. Mikó;M. Tavakoli;J. Pujade-Villar;B. Fehér;D. Fülöp;K. Szabó;M. Bozsó;B. Sipos;K. Somogyi;G. N. Stone	2009	Systematic re-appraisal of the gall-usurping wasp genus Synophrus Hartig, 1843 (Hymenoptera: Cynipidae: Synergini)	Systematic Entomology	34	4	688-711	10.1111/j.1365-3113.2009.00482.x			Several unanswered questions remain regarding the taxonomy and phylogeny of inquiline gallwasps (Cynipidae, Synergini), obligate inhabitants of plant galls induced primarily by other gallwasps (Cynipidae; Cynipini and Diplolepidini). Here we use morphological and molecular data to revise the inquiline genus Synophrus, which are notable for extensively modifying the structure of galls induced by oak gallwasp hosts on oaks in the section Cerris of Quercus subgenus Quercus in the Western-Palaearctic. Synophrus is of particular significance in the diversification of the Synergini because it is assumed to be an early diverging lineage in the Western-Palaearctic. Previous taxonomic treatments have recognised three Western Palaearctic species of Synophrus: S. pilulae Houard, 1911, S. politus Hartig, 1843, and S. olivieri Kieffer, 1898. Our results support the establishment of four further Western Palaearctic species: Synophrus hungaricus Melika & Mikó, sp. n., S. libani Melika & Pujade-Villar, sp. n., S. syriacus Melika, sp. n. and S. hispanicus Pujade-Villar, sp. n. We describe and diagnose these new taxa, identify their phylogenetic relationship, and provide an updated morphological key to the genus Synophrus.
S2388	T. Tachi;H. Shima	2009	Molecular phylogeny of the subfamily Exoristinae (Diptera, Tachinidae), with discussions on the evolutionary history of female oviposition strategy	Systematic Entomology	35	1	148-163	10.1111/j.1365-3113.2009.00497.x			Phylogenetic relationships among tribes in the subfamily Exoristinae (Diptera, Tachinidae) are inferred from four genes, white, 18S, 28S and 16S rDNA. For phylogenetic inferences, maximum parsimony (MP), maximum likelihood (ML) and Bayesian MCMC analyses were performed. The resultant trees are very similar and nearly concordant with the traditional classification based on morphological characters. Our results suggest that the Tachinidae are monophyletic and sister to the Sarcophagidae. The tribal relationships within Exoristinae are in part supported with high reliabilities and are similar to those inferred by Stireman (2002). Based on the resultant trees, the phylogenetic relationships and possible synapomorphies were investigated. Further, we evaluated the transformation of female reproductive habits in the Exoristinae, finding support for the hypothesis that ovolarviparity evolved independently from oviparity in several clades and obtaining differing results about the evolutionary history of micro-ovolarviparity depending on character optimization.
S2530	J. N. Zahniser;C. H. Dietrich	2009	Phylogeny of the leafhopper subfamily Deltocephalinae (Hemiptera: Cicadellidae) based on molecular and morphological data with a revised family-group classification	Systematic Entomology	35	3	489-511	10.1111/j.1365-3113.2010.00522.x			Deltocephalinae is a highly diverse and economically important subfamily of leafhoppers containing over 6200 species and 36 tribes distributed worldwide in habitats ranging from xeric grasslands and shrublands to tropical rainforests. Recent morphological and molecular phylogenetic analyses of Cicadellidae and a morphology-based analysis of Deltocephalinae and related subfamilies indicated that several previously recognized cicadellid subfamilies are closely related to or derived from within Deltocephalinae, but these analyses did not provide a comprehensive or well-supported hypothesis of the phylogeny of Deltocephalinae s.l. due to either low taxon sampling or low branch support. Here, taxon sampling is increased to include members of most family-group taxa of Deltocephalinae and molecular data (~2800 bp 28S rDNA and ~350 bp Histone H3) are added to improve the phylogenetic estimate. Five putative outgroup taxa were included, and parsimony and Bayesian analyses of the combined molecular and morphological (119 characters) data and maximum likelihood analyses of the 28S data showed strong support for the monophyly of Deltocephalinae as defined here. Branches near the base of the tree and toward the tips were longer and better-supported than many of the shorter internal branches. Similar to a previous morphological phylogenetic analysis of Deltocephalinae, all of the grass and sedge specializing tribes were recovered in one common clade, with a few apparent reversals to non-grass feeding. Although support for this clade was low and requires further testing, the results suggest that grass/sedge specialization is a phylogenetically conservative trait within Deltocephalinae. The history of the classification of Deltocephalinae and related subfamilies is reviewed, and based on the results of the phylogenetic analyses presented here, a revised family-group taxonomic classification is proposed. In addition to subfamilies sensu Oman et al. (1990) that were recently included in Deltocephalinae, the following are considered junior synonyms of Deltocephalinae: Acostemminae syn.n., Arrugadinae syn.n., Drakensbergeninae syn.n., Mukariinae syn.n., and Stegelytrinae syn.n. The morphological characters supporting this interpretation of Deltocephalinae are provided and discussed, and a description of the subfamily is provided. A new tribe, Faltalini tribe n. (11 genera, 31 species) is described, and Magnentiini placement n. and Paraphrodini placement n. are transferred to Deltocephalinae from Nioniinae and Aphrodinae, respectively. New placements of genera include: Twiningia Ball and Eusama Oman (Athysanini: Platymetopiina), placement n.; Cerrillus Oman (Athysanini), placement n.; Scaphotettix Matsumura and Agrica Strand (Mukariini), placement n.; Loralia Evans and Phlogotettix Ribaut, (Deltocephalinae, unplaced to tribe), placement n. The recognition of Scaphoideini Oman 1943 as a nomen nudum results in the following placements: Acunasus DeLong, Cantura Oman, Danbara Oman, Osbornellus Ball, Prescottia Ball, Scaphodhara Viraktamath & Mohan, Scaphoideus Uhler, Scaphoidophyes Kirkaldy, Sincholata DeLong, Sobara Oman, and Soleatus DeLong (Deltocephalinae, unplaced to tribe), placement n.
S371	M. Zehnder;A. de Chambrier	2000	Morphological and molecular analyses of the genera Peltidocotyle Diesing 1850 and Othinoscolex Woodland 1933, and a morphological study of Woodlandiella Freze, 1965 (Eucestoda, Proteocephalidea), parasites of South American siluriform fishes (Pimelodidae)	Systematic Parasitology	46	1	33-43	10.1023/A:1006252601201			Morphological studies of type-species of the genera Peltidocotyle Diesing, 1850 and Othinoscolex Woodland, 1933 showed that these genera were synonyms. We thus redescribed the type and fresh material of Peltidocotyle rugosa Diesing, 1850 and P. (= Othinoscolex) lenha (Woodland, 1933) which appeared to constitute two distinct species. They differed in a number of morphological features: the number and layers of testes, the diameter of the metascolex, and the field occupied by the vitelline follicles. Phylogenetic analyses based on DNA sequences of 16S rRNA, 5.8S-ITS2 and 28S rRNA supported these results. Peltidocotyle lenha and Woodlandiella myzofer (Woodland, 1933) were considered conspecific after thorough morphological examination. Concerning host-parasite relationships, P. lenha was reported from two host species, which is unusual for South American Proteocephalidea which generally display an oioxenous-type specificity.
S968	A. de Chambrier;M. Zehnder;C. Vaucher;J. Mariaux	2004	The evolution of the Proteocephalidea (Platyhelminthes, Eucestoda) based on an enlarged molecular phylogeny, with comments on their uterine development	Systematic Parasitology	57	3	159-171				We present a molecular phylogeny of the Proteocephalidea based on 28S rDNA sequence data that is a follow up of the paper by Zehnder & Mariaux (1999). Twenty three new sequences, including 3 outgroups are added in our new dataset. The Gangesiinae and the Acanthotaeniinae appear to be the most primitive clades. They are followed by a robust clade comprising the Palaearctic Proteocephalinae from freshwater fishes. The structure of the more derived clades, comprising most Neotropical and Nearctic species, is less resolved. At the nomenclatural level, we erect a new genus, Glanitaenia n. g., and define an aggregate for the Palaearctic Proteocephalus. After re-examination of all studied taxa, we identify two types of uterine development and show the importance of this character for the systematics of the order. Our phylogeny does not support the classical view of a Neotropical origin of the Proteocephalidea but rather favours an Old World origin of the group either in saurians or Palaearctic Siluriformes.
S234	E. B. Cutler;P. E. Gibbs	1985	A phylogenetic analysis of higher taxa in the phylum Sipuncula	Systematic Zoology	34		162-173				Twelve taxonomic characters of the genera in the phylum of marine worms, Sipuncula, are examined and polarities assigned to the various states. A Hypothetical Ancestral Sipunculan is proposed and probable evolutionary pathways are presented. The PHYLIP Camin-Sokal and the PAUP Wagner parsimony programs are used, as well as Dice's similarity coefficient and UPGMA cluster analysis. These provided both cladistic and a hybrid phenetic/cladistic analyses. Only 5 of the 12 characters are clearly not   homoplastic. While monophyly is not demonstrated in all cases, the 17 genera are now grouped into six families, four orders, and two classes as a result of using evolutionary, phenetic, and phylogenetic methodologies. The selective removal of homoplastic characters within the two classes did not significantly alter the composition of the orders or families. The evident congruence among these methods affirms the value of a synthetic approach.
S232	B. I. Crother;M. M. Miyamoto;W. F. Presch	1986	Phylogeny and biogeography of the lizard family Xantusiidae	Systematic Zoology	35		37-45				The intergeneric relationships of the lizard family Xantusiidae were reevaluated against a cladistic synthesis of morphological (squamation and osteology) and karyological data. The two data sets were analyzed independently and examined for congruent patterns with each other and against biogeographic-geologic data. Patterns indicated by morphological, karyological, and biogeographic-geologic data suggest two sister groups: (1) Klauberina-Xantusia; and (2) Cricosaura-Lepidophyma. Our phylogeny differs from the accepted view of xantusiid relationships in suggesting that Lepidophyma should be transferred from the subfamily Xantusiinae (currently consisting of Klauberina, Lepidophyma, and Xantusia) to the Cricosaurinae. We propose a vicariance model for the distribution of the Xantusia-Klauberina clade.
S247	C. Guyer;J. M. Savage	1986	Cladistic relationships among Anoles (Sauria: Iguanidae)	Systematic Zoology	35		509-531				Relationships among lizards of the anole genera Chamaeleolis, Chamaelinorops, Phenacosaurus, and Anolis (sensu lato) are discussed based upon a cladistic analysis of osteological, karyological, and albumin immunological data. Osteological data support a sister-group relationship of carolinensis subsection and beta section anoles, while anoles of the bimaculatus-cristatellus-cybotes, cuvieri series, and latifrons series are sequentially more distantly related to this terminal cluster. Karyological data support five major groupings. One of these groups represents those forms with the primitive karyotype for lizards and includes: Chamaeleolis, Chamaelinorops, and Phenacosaurus; the cuvieri, cybotes, and latifrons series; and most of the carolinensis subsection. Two groups with advanced karyotypes characterize the cristatellus and bimaculatus series, respectively. The remaining two groups of karyotypes characterize the beta subsection. One population of beta anoles possesses the modal karyotype of both of these groups suggesting a saltatorial evolution of chromosomes within anoles and making difficult the determination of relations among the five groupings of karyotypes. Albumin immunological data support a close sister-group relationship among the beta section, and the cristatellus and bimaculatus series, while the carolinensis series and latifrons series are sequentially more distantly related. Within Anolis (sensu lato), five distinct monophyletic lineages are recognized as genera. The latifrons series (placed in the genus Dactyloa) is derived relative to the primitive anole genera in the presence of autotomic septa on the caudal vertebrae and reduced numbers of aseptate caudal vertebrae. The cuvieri series (placed in Semiurus) shares with other advanced anoles the derived conditions for the shape of the parietal, parietal cresting, total number of parasternal ribs, and number of attached parasternal ribs, but lacks the derived condition of occipital region of more advanced anoles. The bimaculatus-cristatellus-cybotes series (placed in Ctenonotus) represents a lineage possessing a derived condition of the occipital region and a derived total number of parasternal ribs but lacks the derived shape of the interclavicle. The most derived lineages—the carolinensis subsection and beta section—are linked by the derived shape of the interclavicle. The carolinensis subsection is diagnosed by derived numbers of lumbar vertebrae and constitutes the genus Anolis. The beta section is diagnosed by derived processes on the caudal vertebrae and is placed in the genus Norops. This systematic arrangement eliminates the paraphyletic nature of the alpha section and punctatus subsection. Although some aspects of current distribution patterns of anoles must be due to dispersal events, it appears that vicariant events provided the impetus for the separation of the anole genera into their current ranges. On the basis of a cladogram of areas and recent geological evidence of vicariant and accretional events in the Caribbean, it seems that a widespread ancestral distribution of anoles throughout Central and South America, connected by a proto-Greater Antilles bridge, was fragmented by geological events forcing part of the proto-Greater Antilles northeastward towards their present location. This fragmented the distribution of primitive anoles in South America (Phenacosaurus and Dactyloa), and on Hispaniola and Cuba (Chamaelinorops and Chamaeleolis, respectively) from the ancestors of the advanced forms on Central America and associated portions of the rest of the proto-Greater Antilles. More advanced anole genera were added to the Caribbean by additional geological activity which separated the remainder of the proto-Greater Antilles into a Hispaniolan-Puerto Rican block and a Cuban-Hispaniolan block. Separation and accretion of these blocks brought Semiurus, Ctenonotus, and Anolis to their present distributions, leaving Norops on Central America as well as on an attached block that later separated to become Jamaica. The closing of the Panama ian portal allowed extensive invasion of South America by Norops and less extensive invasion of Central America by Dactyloa.
S251	B. C. Livezey	1986	Phylogeny and historical biogeography of steamer-ducks (Anatidae: Tachyeres)	Systematic Zoology	35		458-469				An earlier phylogenetic analysis of morphological characters (Livezey, 1986a) indicates that Tachyeres is a member of a specialized clade of Southern Hemisphere shelducks (Tadorninae). Within Tachyeres, the three flightless species appear to be monophyletic, with the two Atlantic species—T. leucocephalus and T. brachypterus—being closest relatives. This phylogenetic hypothesis mirrors the pattern of morphometric similarities among the four species. Speciation in the genus is explainable by the isolation caused by two major glaciations in southern South America and related fluctuations in sea level, and intervening dispersals. The biogeographic model is compared to a morphometric assessment of populations of T. patachonicus and electrophoretic analyses of the four species of Tachyeres.
S1x28x96c17c02c33	M. E. Barkworth	1990	Nassella (Gramineae, Stipeae): Revised interpretation and nomenclatural changes	Taxon	39		597-614				The taxonomic history of Nassella Desv. is reviewed and its circumscription expanded to include all species of Stipeae with strongly overlapping lemma margins; lemma apices that are fused into a crown; paleas that are highly reduced, ecostate, and glabrous; long epiblasts; and lemma epidermes with very short fundamental cells having silicified cell walls. The expanded genus includes 79 species, almost all of which are South American. Piptochaetium and Stipa sect. Hesperostipa are suggested as the closest extant relatives. Synapomorphies of the three taxa are: brownish callus hairs; fused lemma apices; bulbous-based lemma cilia; silicified lemma fundamental cells; and long epiblasts. A key to putatively monophyletic groups in American Stipeae and a synopsis of Nassella s.l., involving more than 60 new combinations, are presented. The transferred species include representatives from seven subgenera of Stipa L. described by Spegazzini.
S2x5x96c18c28c24	D. H. Les;D. J. Sheridan	1990	Hagstrom's concept of phylogenetic relationships in Potamogeton L. (Potamogetonaceae)	Taxon	39		41-58				Hagstrom's concepts of relationships in Potamogeton, as reflected by the subgeneric, sectional, and subsectional divisions in his classification of the genus are investigated by reconstruction of an evolutionary tree deduced from phylogenetic inferences stated in his monograph. These relationships are explored in the context of results from phenetic and cladistic numerical analyses performed using characters taken from the Hagstrom monograph that are scored for 26 subsections. The Hagstrom classification represents an amalgam of phenetic and cladistic interpretations and the hierarchy does not depict accurately fundamental evolutionary relationships indicated by numerical analyses. Recommendations are provided for developing and testing evolutionary hypotheses that are independent of relationships inferred by this long-standing but problematic classification.
S2x3x96c16c57c52	G. F. Smith;B. E. van Wyk	1991	Generic relationships in the Alooideae (Asphodelaceae)	Taxon	40		557-581				Within the Asphodelaceae the subfamily Alooideae is a natural (monophyletic) group. All the genera in this subfamily are therefore considered to have evolved from a common ancestor, based on the possession of character states which distinguish this complex from all other genera of the Asphodelaceae. However, no comprehensive interpretation of phylogenetic relationships within the entire subfamily based on comparative morphological data and phytogeographical considerations has yet been accomplished. The present paper investigates phylogenetic relationships of the genera Aloe, Astroloba, Chortolirion, Gasteria, Haworthia, Lomatophyllum and Poellnitzia using cladistic methodology. The most obvious similarities amongst these genera are the succulent leaf consistency, crescentiform or cymbiform leaf outline in cross-section and the markedly bimodal karyotype of 2n = 14 chromosomes. For the cladistic analysis 16 characters were used and the genus Kniphofia was selected as outgroup on the basis of two synapomorphies with Alooideae, namely tubular flowers and fused perianth segments. The characters are discussed in detail, polarized into plesiomorphic and apomorphic states and then employed in the generation of a phylogenetic hypothesis using the Hennig86 software package.
S924	U. Meve;S. Liede	2003	Subtribal division of Ceropegieae (Apocynaceae-Asclepiadoideae)	Taxon							Monophyly and sister group relationship of Ceropegieae and Marsdenieae, the two Asclepiadoideae tribes possessing erect pollinia, are confirmed by molecular investigation of non-coding cpDNA markers (trnT-L and trnL-F spacers, and the trnL intron). In Ceropegieae, the analyzed taxa fall in four subclades. The Heterostemma subclade is sister to other three subclades, of which the Conomitra-Leptadenia-Orthanthera subclade is sister to the Anisotoma-Neoschumannia-Riocreuxia-Sisyranthus subclade and to the large subclade comprising the always stem-succulent stapeliads, Brachystelma and Ceropegia. Following these results, subdivision of Ceropegieae into four subtribes, Ceropegiinae, Anisotominae, Heterostemminae and Leptadeniinae, is proposed.
S1143	D. S. Gernandt;G. G. Lopez;S. O. García;A. Liston	2004	Phylogeny and classification of Pinus	Taxon							We used chloroplast DNA sequences from matK and rbcL to infer the phylogeny for 101 of the approximately 111 species of Pinus (Pinaceae). At the level of subsection and above, the cpDNA tree is congruent with phylogenies based on nuclear DNA with one notable exception: cpDNA sequences from subsect. Contortae are sister to all other North American hard pines rather than occupying a more derived position in the same clade. We used the cpDNA tree plus evidence from nuclear ribosomal DNA and morphology to propose a new classification for the genus. The molecular phylogenies are symmetrical at the deepest branches of the genus, allowing for the delineation of two subgenera, each with two sections that form sister groups. Within sections, clades were slightly asymmetric and sometimes ambiguously resolved. To accomodate ambiguity in some interrelationships, avoid the creation of new ranks, and retain traditional names, we recognized up to three monophyletic subsections per section. Subgenus Pinus (the diploxylon, or hard pines) is divided into the predominantly Eurasian and Mediterranean section Pinus, composed of subsections Pinus and Pinaster; and the strictly North American section Trifolius, composed of subsections Australes, Ponderosae, and Contortae. Subgenus Strobus (the haploxylon, or soft pines) is divided into the strictly North American section Parrya, composed of subsections Cembroides, Nelsoniae, and Balfourianae; and the Eurasian and North American section Quinquefolius, composed of subsections Gerardianae, Krempfianae, and Strobi. Mapping of ten morphological and distributional characters indicates that two were diagnostic of infrageneric taxa: the number of vascular bundles per leaf distinguishes subgenus Pinus from subgenus Strobus, and a terminal-positioned umbo on the ovulate cone scale is diagnostic of subsect. Strobi.
S1153	D. S. Gernandt;G. Geada López;S. Ortiz García;A. Liston	2005	Phylogeny and classification of Pinus	Taxon	54		29-42				We investigated the phylogeny of Viburnum using separate and combined analyses of DNA sequence data from two chloroplast (i.e., trnK intron and psbA-trnH intergenic spacer) and three nuclear (i.e., nrITS and two copies of GBSSI) loci. Separate analyses of nuclear and chloroplast data sets resulted in gene trees that were generally congruent with each other and with trees from two previous analyses. However, visual inspection of trees from separate nuclear and chloroplast analyses indicated several areas of localized incongruence; specifically, (i) the position of section Pseudotinus, (ii) species relationships within section Pseudotinus, and (iii) relationships among the core members of section Lentago. Incongruence length difference and the significantly less parsimonious tests indicate significant difference between data partitions. However, gene trees recovered from combined analyses were highly similar to those found in separate analyses, with many relationships well resolved and supported. Although we remain cautious about relationships that showed conflicting resolution in separate analyses, localized difference between data partition do not appear to have affected other regions of the tree. Our analyses provide convincing support for numerous relationships within Viburnum, although there is still uncertainty at the base of the tree (i.e., relationships among the supra-sectional lineages and V. clemensiae, as well as the exact placement of the root). On the basis of these results we suggest informal names for twelve well-supported species groups, as well as for several higher-level clades. These new names provide a descriptive framework and will facilitate future study. We also discuss the biogeographic implications of our phylogeny. In particular we focusing on repeated, although apparently temporarily incongruent, patterns of disjunction between the Old and New Worlds.
S1390	G. A. Verboom;R. Ntsohi	2005	Molecular phylogeny of African Rytidosperma-affiliated danthonioid grasses reveals generic polyphyly and convergent evolution in spikelet morphology	Taxon							Of the 90-95 species included in the Rytidosperma clade of grasses (Danthonioideae: Poaceae) about 20 are native to southern Africa, most of these belonging to the genera Karroochloa, Schismus and Tribolium. Whereas morphological data identify all three genera as being monophyletic, the robustness of this pattern is compromised by high levels of homoplasy. Here we use molecular data (plastid trn¬L-trnF and nuclear ITS sequences) to re-evaluate phylogenetic relationships within the Rytidosperma clade, with the specific aim of testing the monophyly of the African genera. Separate parsimony analyses of the two partitions reveal low levels of incongruence, which may be attributable to incomplete lineage sorting or past hybridization. Analyses of the combined data produce well resolved, strongly supported topologies that are virtually identical, regardless of the inference method used (parsimony or Bayesian inference) or whether or not Œconflict‚ taxa are included. Our data support the monophyly of the Rytidosperma clade (synapomorphies include a punctate-ovate hilum, a large embryo, and lodicule microhairs) as well as the monophyly of the Australasian-South American Rytidosperma s.l. However, the monophyly of Karroochloa, Schismus and Tribolium is strongly contradicted, all three genera being polyphyletic as currently defined. A minimum of five new combinations is required to rectify this situation. Character reconstructions reveal extensive convergence in a number of morphological features, especially those previously used to define genera. We suggest that the convergent pattern of evolution displayed by these traits, most of which describe spikelet/ diaspore morphology, is linked to their functionality in seed dispersal and burial, and that this has compromised their utility as phylogenetic markers.
S1269	S. J. Wagstaff;I. Breitwieser;U. Swenson	2005	Origin and relationships of the austral genus Abrotanella (Asteraceae) inferred from DNA sequences	TAXON							Relationships of the small austral genus Abrotanella are uncertain. It was previously included in the Anthemideae or more recently in the Senecioneae. We conducted a phylogenetic analysis of 39 accessions including most species of Abrotanella and putatative relatives including Blennosperma, Crocidium and Ischnea. These four genera have been considered to form subtribe Blennospermatinae. Our results suggest that the Blennospermatinae are polyphyletic; Blennosperma, Crocidium and Ischnea form a well-supported clade nested within the Senecioneae, while Abrotanella forms another well-supported clade that is distinct from these genera, and its sister is not resolved. Molecular dating of Abrotanella suggests that the lineage initially diverged during the early Miocene. Secondary species radiations in Australasia and in southern South America that occurred 3 million years ago undoubtedly reflect long-distance dispersal, colonization, and speciation. The divergence estimates are robust to the genes that were sequenced, to changes in the tree topology, and to the method used to estimate divergence times.
S1631	J. I. Davis;G. Petersen;O. Seberg;D. W. Stevenson;C. R. Hardy;M. P. Simmons;F. A. Michelangeli;D. H. Goldman;L. M. Campbell;C. D. Specht;J. I. Cohen	2006	Are mitochondrial genes useful for the analysis of monocot relationships?	Taxon							A phylogenetic analysis of monocots and related dicots was conducted, using a four-gene matrix consisting of two genes from the plastid genome (matK and rbcL) and two from the mitochondrial genome (atpA/atp1 and cob). The taxon sample includes 101 monocots and 36 dicots, and all four genes were sampled for all 137 taxa. Jackknife support was assessed for clades resolved by the four-gene analysis, and compared to support for the same clades by each of the four three-gene subset matrices, in order to quantify the degree to which each gene contributed to or detracted from support for each clade. Instances of positively and negatively correlated support for clades by genes of the same and different genomes were observed. In particular, the placement of Acorus within a clade that also includes Tofieldiaceae, Araceae, and Alismatales s.s., as opposed to its frequent placement as sister of all other monocots, is supported by atpA and matK. The results indicate that genes from the mitochondrial genome provide a unique test of relationships that have been inferred with plastid-encoded genes.
S1486	C. Parra-Osorio;M. Bayly;F. Udovicic;P. Ladiges	2006	ETS sequences support the monophyly of the eucalypt genus Corymbia (Myrtaceae)	Taxon							The generic classification of the eucalypts, especially recognition of the genus Corymbia, has been controversial. The phylogeny of Corymbia and related eucalypt groups was investigated using nuclear ETS sequences, and combined ETS and ITS sequences. Both the ETS and combined datasets support the monophyly of Corymbia, strengthening the argument for separate generic recognition. Three major eucalypt clades are confirmed: Corymbia + Angophora; Eucalyptus s.s.; and the Eucalyptopsis group. Within Corymbia, relationships are broadly consistent with phylogenies based on morphological and anatomical characters; sections Ochraria, Blakearia, and Politaria are all supported as monophyletic, although sect. Rufaria is monophyletic only with the inclusion of the monotypic sect. Apteria. Within Eucalyptus s.s., relationships are generally consistent with those shown by previous molecular studies. Within the Eucalyptopsis group, Allosyncarpia is sister to the clade Stockwellia + Eucalyptopsis. Relationships between the major eucalypt clades are equivocal, but combined analysis of ETS and ITS data shows Corymbia + Angophora as sister to Eucalyptus ˆ the rainforest taxa of the Eucalyptopsis group being outside this clade. Patterns of relationship and distribution are consistent with differentiation of major lineages of Corymbia prior to the isolation of taxa (now relictual) in eastern and south-western Australia, arguably before the mid-Miocene.
S1543	F. O. Zuloaga;L. M. Giussani;O. Morrone	2006	Hopia, a new monotypic genus segregated from Panicum (Poaceae: Panicoideae: Paniceae)	Taxon							Taxonomic features of Panicum obtusum, previously classified in subg. Agrostoides, sect. Obtusa of Panicum, are reviewed and compared with other taxa in the Paniceae. The new genus Hopia is proposed on the basis of morphological and molecular characters to include a species ranging from Southern United States to Central México. Affinities of the new genus with other genera of the Paniceae are also discussed.
S1714	L. Bohs	2007	Phylogeny of the Cyphomandra clade of the genus Solanum (Solanaceae) based on ITS sequence data	Taxon							About 13 major clades can be recognized within the genus Solanum (Solanaceae) based on chloroplast DNA sequence data. One of these is the Cyphomandra clade, which includes about 50 neotropical species. These have traditionally been placed into two to three sections: S. section Pachyphylla (formerly recognized as the genus Cyphomandra), S. section Cyphomandropsis, and S. section Glaucophyllum (monotypic and sometimes placed in S. section Cyphomandropsis). Phylogenetic relationships among 61 accessions of 35 species of the Cyphomandra clade are investigated using sequence data from the nuclear ITS region analysed using parsimony and Bayesian inference. The Cyphomandra clade forms a monophyletic group, but the ITS data are equivocal as to the monophyly of sections Pachyphylla and Cyphomandropsis. Four well-supported groups of species can be recognized within the Cyphomandra clade; these conform in part with species groups proposed on the basis of morphology. The distribution of self-incompatible and self-compatible breeding systems is mapped onto the molecular cladogram, and patterns of evolution of enlarged anther connectives, osmophores, and volatile composition are discussed in light of hypothesized phylogenetic relationships.
S1899	S. Oh;P. S. Manos	2007	Molecular phylogenetics and cupule evolution in Fagaceae as inferred from nuclear CRABS CLAW sequences	Taxon							Fagaceae includes nine genera and ca. 1,000 species, making it one of the largest and economically important groups within Fagales. Phylogenetic relationships remain unresolved despite a long history of systematic study. We used <i>CRABS CLAW</i>, a single-copy nuclear gene, to generate over 2,900 base pairs of new sequence data, and combined it with previously collected molecular data to examine morphological evolution in the Fagaceae. We clarified the relationships of <i>Chrysolepis</i>, <i>Lithocarpus</i> and <i>Quercus</i>, and in this improved phylogenetic context we inferred morphological transformations of the cupule. Phylogenetic analyses supported an origin for <i>Quercus</i> from a castaneoid ancestor and a novel sister group relationship for Asian <i>Lithocarpus</i> and <i>Chrysolepis</i>; however the monophyly of both <i>Lithocarpus</i> and subfamily Castaneoideae was rejected. Our data suggest that North American <i>Lithocarpus densiflorus</i> is only distantly related to Asian <i>Lithocarpus</i>, supporting the hypothesis that the uniflorous cupules of <i>L. densiflorus</i> and <i>Quercus</i> are derived from dichasium cupules via loss of lateral flowers. The sister group relationship of Asian <i>Lithocarpus</i> and <i>Chrysolepis</i> is supported by the morphological synapomorphy that each fruit is surrounded by a cupule. A new hypothesis is proposed to explain the evolution of the unusual cupules of Asian <i>Lithocarpus</i> and <i>Chrysolepis</i>. In this model, every flower represents a reduced dichasium, and we interpret the cupules of these taxa to be compound in nature, formed by multiple reduced dichasia derived from single-flowered cupules.
S1912	G. Petersen;O. Seberg;S. Thorsøe;T. Jørgensen;B. Mathew	2007	A phylogeny of the genus Crocus (Iridaceae) based on sequence data from five plastid regions	Taxon							For the first time a phylogenetic analysis of the genus Crocus is presented. The phylogeny includes all but two of the currently 87 recognized species of the genus. The analysis is based on a total of 222 phylogenetically informative characters derived from nucleotide sequence data from three protein-coding (ndhF, accD, rpoC1) and two non-coding (trnH-psbA, rpl36-rps8) plastid regions. The phylogenetic hypothesis is in conflict with the primary classification of Mathew into subgenera and sections. Most notably by placing the highly morphologically deviant C. banaticus (subgenus Crociris), not as sister group to subgenus Crocus, but imbedded within it. The grouping of the taxa into series is better supported, though not entirely. Of the 15 series recognized by Mathew, eight are confirmed as being monophyletic, monophyly of one more remains a possibility, and monophyly of a further two series is only violated by one taxon. Not unexpectedly, the two most species rich groups, series Reticulati and series Biflori encompassing almost 1/3 of all species, are clearly non-monophyletic, but the present data do not satisfactorily solve their phylogenetic relationships.
S1799	R. C. Winkworth;J. Lundberg;M. J. Donoghue	2007	Toward a resolution of campanulid phylogeny, with a special reference to the placement of Dipsacales	Taxon							Broad-scale phylogenetic analyses of the angiosperms and of the Asteridae have failed to confidently resolve relationships among the major lineages of the campanulid Asteridae (i.e., the euasterid II of APG, 2003). To address this problem we assembled presently available sequences for a core set of 50 taxa, representing the diversity of the four largest lineages (i.e., Apiales, Aquifoliales, Asterales, and Dipsacales) as well as the smaller „unplaced‰ groups (e.g., Bruniaceae, Paracryphiaceae, Columelliaceae). We constructed four data matrices for phylogenetic analysis: a chloroplast coding matrix (i.e., atpB, matK, ndhF, and rbcL), a chloroplast non-coding matrix (i.e., rps16 intron, trnT-F region, and trnV-atpE IGS), a combined chloroplast data set (i.e. all seven chloroplast regions), and a combined genome matrix (i.e. seven chloroplast regions plus 18S and 26S rDNA). Bayesian analyses of these data sets using mixed substitution models produced often well-resolved and supported trees. Consistent with more weakly supported results from previous studies, our analyses support the monophyly of the four major clades and the relationships among them. Most importantly, Asterales are inferred to be sister to a clade containing Apiales and Dipsacales. Paracryphiaceae is consistently placed sister to the Dipsacales. However, the exact relationships of Bruniaceae, Columelliaceae, and an Escallonia clade depended upon the data set. Areas of poor resolution in combined analyses may be partly explained by conflict between the coding and non-coding data partitions. We discuss the implications of these results for our understanding of campanulid phylogeny and evolution, paying special attention to how our findings bear on character evolution and biogeography in Dipsacales.
S2229	L. Cecchi;F. Selvi	2008	Phylogenetic relationships of the monotypic genera Halacsya and Paramoltkia and the origins of serpentine adaptation in circum-mediterranean Lithospermeae (Boraginaceae): insights from ITS and matK DNA sequences	Taxon							Halacsya and Paramoltkia are monotypic and partially sympatric genera in the Balkans, with no clear relationships among extant Lithospermeae due to striking morphological autapomorphies and scarcity of phylogenetic analyses in this group. Both of the species H. sendtneri and P. doerfleri show a strict selectivity for serpentine soils, posing the question of whether this edaphic specialization reflects a common ancestry or a parallel process of adaptive evolution in unrelated lineages. DNA sequences from the nuclear ITS and chloroplast matK regions were generated from multiple accessions of Halacsya and Paramoltkia, and for representatives of all genera of circum-mediterranean Lithospermeae. SEM observations of pollen stereostructure were also conducted to test relationships indicated by molecular phylogenies. Parsimony analyses revealed the existence of a clade of strongly differentiated monotypic Lithospermeae including Halacsya and Paramoltkia; ITS provided a better resolution of relationships and showed the two genera to be sistergroups close to Mairetis and Moltkiopsis, and no affinity with Moltkia as supposed by past authors. Pollen characters corroborated the phylogenetic affinity between the two Balkan genera. Five other monophyletic clades were recognised: Onosma-Echium, Moltkia, Lithospermum s.l., Arnebia-Macrotomia and Alkanna-Podonosma. Mapping the main edaphic habitats of Lithospermeae onto molecular cladograms showed that serpentinophytism as an obligate condition originated separately in the clade of monotypic genera and in that of Onosma-Echium. In Halacsya and Paramoltkia it represents therefore an early ecological synapomorphy probably originated in-situ from non-serpentine ancestors also close to Moltkiopsis and Mairetis.
S2140	S. Donadío;L. M. Giussani;E. A. Kellogg;F. O. Zuloaga;O. Morrone	2008	A preliminary molecular phylogeny of Pennisetum and Cenchrus (Poaceae-Paniceae) based on the trnL-F, rpl16 chloroplast markers	Taxon							Pennisetum (80--140 species) and Cenchrus (16--22 species) are close related genera of Paniceae, both distributed in tropical and sub-tropical regions. The distinction between Pennisetum and Cenchrus is not clearly defined, and currently, no comprehensive taxonomic treatment is available for either genus. Chloroplast DNA sequence data (rpl16 and trnL-F region) were analyzed to test their monophyly, species relationships, and infrageneric classifications. Phylogenetic analyses of individual genomic regions, and a combined dataset, including indel-coded information, were performed under parsimony. Bayesian inference analyses were also performed for the individual and combined datasets. Selected geographical, chromosomal and diagnostic morphological characters were mapped onto the phylogeny to investigate evolutionary trends. Our results support a monophyletic bristle clade and the close relationship between Pennisetum and Cenchrus. Excluding Pennisetum lanatum, Pennisetum is paraphyletic because Cenchrus is nested within it. Sections Pennisetum and Gymnotrix are polyphyletic, while the relationship of other sections and the diagnostic characters used to identify infrageneric taxa, are also discussed. Our molecular phylogenetic results show a close relationship among the domesticated species P. glaucum, and P. purpureum, P. squamulatum, P. nervosum, and P. sieberianum, suggesting the potential use of these species in crop improvement. The Pennisetum-Cenchrus clade shows an independent reduction ( x = 5, 7, 8 ) or duplication ( x = 17 ) of the basic chromosome number from the ancestral x = 9. American Pennisetum and Cenchrus species appear to have originated from Old World species more than once during the evolution. A core group of American species of Cenchrus with a basic chromosome number of x = 17, and retrorsely barbed bristles could be restricted to Cenchrus s.s.
S2097	I. Draper;L. Hedenäs	2008	Circumscription of European taxa within the Sciuro-hypnum reflexum complex (Brachytheciaceae, Bryophyta), based on molecular and morphological data	Taxon							ITS, rpl16 and trnG sequences, together with morphological data, were used to circumscribe the European problematic taxa within the Sciuro-hypnum reflexum complex. Strongly supported monophyletic clades sustain several of the target taxa as distinct species (S. reflexum, S. starkii, S. tromsoeense Draper & Hedenäs comb. nov., S. glaciale, S. dovrense Draper & Hedenäs comb. nov. and S. latifolium), but the segregation of two of the taxa under study (S. nelsonii and Brachythecium glaciale var. gelidum) is found to be inconsistent with our results and they are therefore synonymized.
S1946	T. Pleines;F. R. Blattner	2008	Phylogeographic implications of an AFLP phylogeny of the diploid Hordeum species of the New World	Taxon							The American species of Hordeum form a monophyletic group of closely related species, in which a rapid radiation took place in South America during the last 2 million years. Species relationships within this group could up to now not be clarified, because of the small sequence differences among the species or incomplete sorting of ancient alleles. To overcome these problems we analyzed 65 samples covering all 13 diploid New World species with amplified fragment length polymorphism analysis (AFLP). Six primer combinations yielded 858 fragments, 765 of which were potentially parsimony informative. Two samples of diploid Asian Hordeum species were included as outgroup taxa. AFLP analysis was able to resolve species relationships, showing Californian H. brachyantherum as sister to four major phylogenetic groups from South America. These are a central Argentine and northern Andean group (H. cordobense, H. muticum), a mainly central to northern Argentine group including two North American species (H. erectifolium, H. euclaston, H. intercedens, H. pusillum, H. stenostachys), a group occurring mainly in southern Patagonia (H. comosum, H. patagonicum, H. pubiflorum), and a group of two species (H. chilense, H. flexuosum), whose close relationship has not been inferred before. Within these groups, sister species can be resolved with high bootstrap support, while statistical support for the branches defining the relationships among these groups is relatively low. The AFLP results support the monophyly of the three annual New World species, as well as earlier findings regarding intercontinental long-distance dispersals from South to North America.
S1925	C. J. Rothfels;M. D. Windham;A. L. Grusz;G. J. Gastony;K. M. Pryer	2008	Toward a monophyletic Notholaena (Pteridaceae): Resolving patterns of evolutionary convergence in xeric-adapted ferns	Taxon	57	3	712-724				Cheilanthoid ferns (Pteridaceae) are a diverse and ecologically important clade, unusual among ferns for their ability to colonize and diversify within xeric habitats. These extreme habitats are thought to drive the extensive evolutionary convergence, and thus morphological homoplasy, that has long thwarted a natural classification of cheilanthoid ferns. Here we present the first multigene phylogeny to focus on taxa traditionally assigned to the large genus Notholaena. New World taxa (Notholaena sensu Tryon) are only distantly related to species occurring in the Old World (Notholaena sensu Pichi-Sermolli). The circumscription of Notholaena adopted in recent American floras is shown to be paraphyletic, with species usually assigned to Cheilanthes and Cheiloplecton nested within it. The position of Cheiloplecton is particularly surprising˜given its well-developed false indusium and non-farinose blade, it is morphologically anomalous within the „notholaenoids.‰ In addition to clarifying natural relationships, the phylogenetic hypothesis presented here helps to resolve outstanding nomenclatural issues and provides a basis for examining character evolution within this diverse, desert-adapted clade.
S2093	E. Tripp;T. Daniel;J. Lendemer;L. McDade	2008	New molecular and morphological insights prompt transfer of Blechum to Ruellia (Acanthaceae)	Taxon							The genus Blechum P. Browne (Acanthaceae) is best known by the widespread tropical weed formerly referred to as Blechum pyramidatum (Lam.) Urb. (recently re-established as Ruellia blechum L.). Some species of Blechum have been transferred to Ruellia based on macromorphological and molecular data, but comprehensive study of taxa assigned to Blechum is lacking. We reexamined morphological characters that have been used to distinguish Blechum from Ruellia including inflorescence structure and pollen and capsule morphology. Second, we conducted phylogenetic analyses including nine accessions from five of six species traditionally treated in Blechum (and that we here consider valid species) plus a synoptic sample of species of Ruellia based on the work of the first author. Results indicate that Blechum is nested within Ruellia with strong support. An alternative phylogenetic hypothesis of monophyly of Ruellia exclusive of species traditionally treated in Blechum was rejected under a likelihood but not a parsimony criterion. Based on morphological similarities, common chromosome numbers, and molecular data, we transfer the entire genus Blechum to Ruellia. We studied specimens and images of specimens of as many pertinent historical collections that we could acquire. This study resulted in nomenclatural and taxonomic renovations that include several new taxonomic synonymies (reduction of Blechum killipii, Blechum linnaei, and Blechum trinitense), two new combinations (Ruellia haughtii and Ruellia panamensis), one new lectotypification (Blechum brownei alpha subcordatum f. albiflorum), and additional recommendations for future typification. Based on our morphological and molecular studies, six species of Ruellia are treated as constituting the Blechum lineage of Ruellia. A preliminary key is provided to distinguish these species, but the Blechum lineage as a whole deserves further attention and fieldwork to determine the precise limits of each taxon. Acanthaceae, Blechum, nomenclature, phylogeny, Ruellia, taxonomy.
S1962	J. Zhou;H. Peng;S. R. Downie;Z. W. Liu;X. Gong	2008	A molecular phylogeny for Chinese Apiaceae subfamily Apioideae inferred from nuclear ribosomal DNA internal transcribed spacer sequences	Taxon							The Hengduan Mountains of the Sino-Himalayas are rich in endemic species of Apiaceae subfamily Apioideae. To investigate relationships among these species and to ascertain their higher-level phylogenetic placements within the subfamily, we examined 106 accessions (representing 100 species from 52 genera) including the Chinese endemic genera Changium, Cyclorhiza, Notopterygium, Nothosmyrnium, and Sinolimprichtia. Sixty-three of these accessions were newly sequenced. Phylogenetic trees were inferred using maximum parsimony and Bayesian analyses of nuclear ribosomal DNA internal transcribed spacer (ITS) sequences. The phylogenetic trees were highly consistent and revealed several major clades heretofore unrecognized in the subfamily. Changium and Cyclorhiza fall within the Komarovia clade of previous investigations; Nothosmyrnium allies with tribe Pimpinelleae. Notopterygium and Sinolimprichtia along with many other taxa of Sino-Himalayan distribution comprise a well-supported East Asia clade; Vicatia and Haplosphaera arise within a paraphyletic Notopterygium. Other newly recognized, well-supported major clades include the Chamaesium clade, sister group to all other Apioideae except tribe Bupleureae, and the Asian Acronema clade, comprising such genera as Acronema, Pternopetalum, and Meeboldia. The Chamaesium clade and Bupleureae represent the earliest diverging lineages of Apioideae in Asia. Sinodielsia allies weakly with Pterocyclus or is a sister group to the clade of tribe Apieae plus Pterocyclus; Sinodielsia is distinct from Meeboldia and Vicatia. Genera whose boundaries are poorly defined and controversial on the basis of morphology (Ligusticum, Peucedanum, Physospermopsis, Pimpinella, Pleurospermum, Sinocarum, Tongoloa, and Trachyspermum) are not monophyletic in the ITS-based phylogenies. Further study of these Chinese endemics is necessary to produce a comprehensive, modern classification of Apiaceae subfamily Apioideae.
S2191	R. G. Olmstead;L. Bohs;H. M. Abdel-Migid;E. Santiago-Velentín;V. F. Garcia;S. M. Collier	2008	A molecular phylogeny of the Solanaceae.	Taxon	57	4	1159-1181				A phylogeny of Solanaceae is presented based on the chloroplast DNA regions ndhF and trnLF. With 89 genera and 190 species included, this represents a nearly comprehensive genus-level sampling and provides a framework phylogeny for the entire family that helps integrate many previously-published phylogenetic studies within Solanaceae. The four genera comprising the family Goetzeaceae and the monotypic families Duckeodendraceae, Nolanaceae, and Sclerophylaceae, often recognized in traditional classifications, are shown to be included in Solanaceae. The current results corroborate previous studies that identify a monophyletic subfamily Solanoideae and the more inclusive X = 12 clade, which includes Nicotiana and the Australian tribe Anthocercideae. These results also provide greater resolution among lineages within Solanoideae, confirming Jaltomata as sister to Solanum and identifying a clade comprised primarily of tribes Capsiceae (Capsicum and Lycianthes) and Physaleae. Stronger evidence also is provided for the inclusion of Capsicum within a paraphyletic Lycianthes. Solanaceae are a predominantly New World group, with several lineages represented on other continents. Apart from events within Solanum (for which sampling in this study is inadequate for biogeographic interpretations) the Old World representatives of Solanaceae can be accounted for by eight or nine dispersal events.
S2094	M. M. Arbo;S. M. Espert	2009	Morphology, phylogeny and biogeography of Turnera (Turneraceae)	Taxon	58	2	457-467				Cladistic analyses are made upon morphological characters and base chromosome numbers in order to test the monophyly of the nine series of genus Turnera (Turneraceae). Series Annulares and Turnera are monophyletic, as are Anomalae with the exception of two species with unknown fruit and seed morphology. Series Microphyllae and Papilliferae should be merged on one side, and Series Salicifoliae and Stenodictyae with some species of series Capitatae on the other. Series Capitatae is not a natural group, and Series Leiocarpae is unresolved. The T.sidoides complex should be separated into a new series. The biogeographic analyses show that the major diversification of the genus took place in the Chaquean subregion, with vicariant and dispersal events to the other Neotropical subregions.
S2244	B. Frajman;N. Heidari;B. Oxelman	2009	Phylogenetic relationships of Atocion and Viscaria (Sileneae, Caryophyllaceae) inferred from chloroplast, nuclear ribosomal, and low-copy gene DNA sequences	Taxon							Atocion and Viscaria are two of seven small genera recognised in the tribe Sileneae on the basis of molecular phylogenies. The aim of the present study is to infer phylogenetic relationships among their subordinate taxa, using chloroplast (rps16 intron, psbE-petG spacer region) and nuclear (ITS and the RNA polymerase gene family) DNA sequences. Relative dating was used to discriminate among intralineage and interlineage processes that cause incongruence among different gene-tree topologies. Atocion asterias is demonstrated to belong to Viscaria, which contains three species: V. vulgaris (incl. V. atropurpurea), V. alpina, and V. asterias. Infraspecific differentiation of V. alpina is not supported by the sequence data. The traditional sectional delimitation of Atocion taxa within Silene is not supported phylogenetically, and Silene tatarinowii as well as S. hoefftiana do not belong to Atocion, as classified previously. Atocion contains six species: A. armeria, A. compactum, A. lerchenfeldianum, A. reuterianum, A. rupestre, and A. scythicinum (not included in our study). With this circumscription, Atocion and Viscaria, respectively, form monophyletic groups in the cpDNA, ITS, RPD2a and RPD2b trees, but not in the RPA2 tree, where such relationships were possibly distorted by ancient hybridisation. Hybridisation with subsequent chloroplast capture is likely to have taken place in the evolutionary history of A. compactum. Three novel nomenclatural combinations are made: Atocion reuterianum, A. scythicinum and Viscaria asterias.
S2257	S. M. Sede;O. Morrone;S. S. Aliscioni;L. M. Giussani;F. O. Zuloaga	2009	Oncorachis and Sclerochlamys, two new segregated genera from Streptostachys (Poaceae, Panicoideae, Paniceae): a revision based on molecular, morphological and anatomical characters	Taxon							Streptostachys includes, up to the present, five South American species. Generic boundaries are discussed in the present work, and compared with allied genera of the tribe Paniceae. As a result, two new genera are proposed on the basis of morphological, anatomical and molecular characters: Streptostachys macrantha and S. ramosa are segregated into Oncorachis, while the genus Sclerochlamys is based on Streptostachys rigidifolia. The phylogenetic position of the new genera and Streptostachys are evaluated within the Paniceae; differences and similarities with the sister taxa are also discussed.
S2242	F. Selvi;L. Cecchi;A. Coppi	2009	Phylogeny, karyotype evolution and taxonomy of Cerinthe (Boraginaceae)	Taxon							A phylogenetic and karyological analysis of the small but poorly known genus Cerinthe L. (Boraginaceae-Lithospermeae) was performed using ITS sequences and standard chromosomal techniques. All taxa are diploid with 2n = 16 or 2n = 18 and show a variable degree of infraspecific variation, in particular in the polymorphic groups of C. major and C. minor. The base x = 8 is only found in the C. major group, while x = 9 occurs in the other five species of the genus, C. minor, C. alpina, C. tenuiflora, C. retorta and C. palaestina. Change in base number is associated to a key evolutionary event, i.e. the early split between the two well supported clades of C. major, corresponding to subgenus Cerinthe, and that of all other taxa mentioned above, which should be included in subgenus Ceranthe. The latter is subdivided into the SE Mediterranean, annual lineage of C. palaestina-C. retorta and the mainly continental, perennial group of C. minor- C. alpina, the sister of which is the Corsican endemic C. tenuiflora. The base x = 9 and the low intrachromosmal asymmetry of this species is assumed as the plesiomorphic karyological condition in Cerinthe, while descending aneuploidy connected with the shortening of the life-cycle may have been the driving force for the origin of x = 8 in the terophytic taxa of subgenus Cerinthe. A taxonomic revision of the genus with selected synonymy, types, diagnostic morphological characters, original iconographies, distribution maps and explanatory notes concerning nomenclatural aspects is finally given. Three subspecies are recognised in the two polymorphic species C. major and C. minor, while C. tenuiflora, C. retorta and the poorly known C. palaestina are well defined taxa with little internal variation.
S2316	D. L. Salariato;L. M. Giussani;O. Morrone;F. O. Zuloaga	2009	Rupichloa, a new genus segregated from Urochloa (Poaceae) based on morphological and molecular data	Taxon	58	2	381-391				Rupichloa, a new genus of Paniceae, restricted to Bahia and Minas Gerais, Brazil, and including two species: R. acuminata and R. decidua are here described. Phylogenetic analyses of DNA sequence data from plastid rpl16 and ndhF, indicate that both species do not belong to Urochloa, genus in which they were previously placed. Also, morphological characters are analyzed in relation with Urochloa. Hence, Rupichloa was established on the basis of morphological and molecular characters. Additionally, affinities of the new genus with other genera of the Paniceae are also discussed.
S2329	L. Struwe;V. A. Albert;M. F. Calió;C. Frasier;K. B. Lepis;K. G. Mathews;J. R. Grant	2009	Evolutionary patterns in neotropical Helieae (Gentianaceae): evidence from morphology, chloroplast and nuclear DNA sequences	Taxon	58	2	479-499				Parsimony-based phylogenetic analyses of the neotropical tribe Helieae (Gentianaceae) are presented, including 22 of the 23 genera and 60 species. This study is based on data from morphology, palynology, and seed micromorphology (127 structural characters), and DNA sequences (matK, trnL intron, and ITS). Phylogenetic reconstructions based on ITS and morphology provided the greatest resolution, morphological data further helping to tentatively place several taxa for which DNA was not available (Celiantha, Lagenanthus, Rogersonanthus, Roraimaea, Senaea, Sipapoantha, Zonanthus). Celiantha, Prepusa and Senaea together appear as the sister clade to the rest of Helieae. The remainder of Helieae, which is largely divided into two large subclades, the Macrocarpaea subclade and the Symbolanthus subclade. The first subclade includes Macrocarpaea, sister to Chorisepalum, Tachia, and Zonanthus. Irlbachia and Neblinantha are placed as sisters to the Symbolanthus subclade, which includes Aripuana, Calolisianthus, Chelonanthus, Helia, Lagenanthus, Lehmanniella, Purdieanthus, Rogersonanthus, Roraimaea, Sipapoantha, and Symbolanthus. Generic-level polyphyly is detected in Chelonanthus and Irlbachia. Evolution of morphological characters is discussed, and new pollen and seed characters are evaluated for the first time in a combined morphological-molecular phylogenetic analysis.
S2314	Y. X. Qiu;X. S. Qi;X. F. Jin;X. Y. Tao;C. X. Fu;A. Naiki;H. P. Comes	2009	Population genetic structure, phylogeography, and demographic history of Platycrater arguta (Hydrangeaceae) endemic to East China and South Japan, inferred from chloroplast DNA sequence variation	Taxon	58	4	1226-1241				Based on chloroplast DNA (cpDNA) sequences (trnD-trnT and trnH¨CpsbA intergenic spacer) variation, we conducted an integrated analysis of population genetic structure and historical demographic events of two geographically separated groups of all presently known populations of Platycrater arguta, located in East China (four populations) and South Japan (eight populations).
S2296	J. G. Rohwer;J. Li;B. Rudolph;S. A. Schmidt;H. van der Werff;H. W. Li	2009	Is Persea (Lauraceae) monophyletic? Evidence from nuclear ribosomal ITS sequences	Taxon	58	4	1153-1167				The delimitation of genera within the Persea group (Lauraceae) has always been controversial. In an attempt to resolve the phylogenetic lines within this group, we analyzed ITS sequences of 61 species of the Persea group (Lauraceae) and 30 other species of Lauraceae. Several of the traditional genera or subgenera form well supported groups, viz., Persea subgen. Eriodaphne, Machilus, Persea subgen. Persea, and Alseodaphne including Dehaasia. The included species of Phoebe form two clades that are unresolved with respect to Alseodaphne. However, Persea subgen. Eriodaphne (together with the Macaronesian Apollonias barbujana) forms one of the clades of an unresolved basal trichotomy within the Persea group, whereas Persea subgen. Persea is well supported as member of an otherwise Asian clade including Alseodaphne and Phoebe. This indicates that Persea, as currently circumscribed, is not monophyletic. The affinities of the Macaronesian Persea indica are clearly American rather than Asian.
S2566	N. Devos;N. P. Barker;B. Nordenstam;L. Mucina	2010	A multi-locus phylogeny of Euryops (Asteraceae, Senecioneae) augments support for the Cape to Cairo hypothesis of floral migrations in Africa	Taxon	59	1	57-67				With about 100 species, Euryops (Cass.) Cass. ranks among the most speciose genera of the tribe Senecioneae (Asteraceae). The genus has its greatest diversity in South Africa, and displays an interesting disjunct distribution with most of the taxa found in southern Africa and a group of eight endemic species confined to the mountains of tropical East Africa and northeastern Africa. Molecular phylogenetic analyses of DNA sequence data from three chloroplast fragments and the nuclear ITS region were used to reconstruct the evolutionary history of 41 Euryops species in order to unravel species relationships and to determine the origin of the disjunct Afromontane taxa. Our results show a lack of support and resolution in the internal structure of the trees, but also reveal strong incongruence between the ITS and cpDNA datasets as assessed by Bayes Factors. We hypothesise that this is a consequence of the isolation and divergence of many populations over a short time period at some point in the history of the genus. Molecular dating based on our phylogenetic tree suggests that the genus diversified in South Africa around four million years ago. The origin of the East African species, dated at 1.9 Ma, well after the uplift of the East African mountains, is consistent with a scenario of a single dispersal event from South Africa northwards into the tropical East African mountains where diversification occurred, creating a monophyletic group of regional Afromontane endemics.
S2336	J. Kucera;K. Marhold;J. Lihova	2010	Cardamine maritima group (Brassicaceae) in the amphi-Adriatic area: a hotspot of species diversity revealed by DNA sequences and morphological variation	Taxon	59	1	148-164				The western Balkans, characterized by high rates of endemism, are recognized as one of the most diverse and species-rich areas of Europe. The present study focuses on diploid speciation in a poorly explored ancestral group of the genus Cardamine that is distributed in the amphi-Adriatic territory. Morphological data and DNA sequences (plastid trnL intron and trnL-trnF spacer, ITS of nrDNA, and single-copy nuclear gene CHS) were used to address taxonomic, phylogenetic and evolutionary questions. Recognition of several previously described, but recently not accepted narrow endemics is supported (C. fialae, C. rupestris, C. serbica). C. maritima s.str. is segregated into three distinct entities, giving them a species rank. A new taxonomic concept of the group is proposed, including detailed chorological survey, identification key and nomenclatural accounts with synonymy, typifications, description of the new species C. montenegrina, and publication of C. adriatica, nomen novum. Chloroplast data indicate initial radiation of the ancestral lineage into a series of distinct endemic species; the lack of resolution at internal nodes and incongruence with nuclear phylogenies suggest that this occurred rapidly. Nuclear data, in turn, partly show geographic structuring within the core of the studied group, indicating more recent hybridization events. It is assumed that glacial-induced local-scale and altitudinal migrations along the Balkan coastline and in adjacent massifs caused contacts between previously isolated populations, resulting in occasional interspecific gene-flow. Trans-Adriatic contacts and gene exchange are suggested as well.
S2283	R. Nyffeler;U. Eggli	2010	Disintegrating Portulacaceae: A new familial classification of the suborder Portulacineae (Caryophyllales) based on molecular and morphological data	Taxon	59	1	227-240				Traditional classifications of the suborder Portulacineae recognize six families: Basellaceae, Cactaceae, Didiereaceae, Halophytaceae, Hectorellaceae, and Portulacaceae. However, phylogenetic analyses based on molecular sequence data indicate that the traditional family Portulacaceae is paraphyletic and consists of three distinct lineages that also include Cactaceae, Didiereaceae, and Hectorellaceae. We use sequence data from the chloroplast gene matK and ndhF representing 64 species of Portulacineae and outgroups to reconstruct their phylogenetic relationships with Bayesian and maximum parsimony inference methods. Evidence from these molecular phylogenetic analyses as well as from comparative morphological investigations, allow us to propose a revised familial classification of the suborder Portulacineae. We recognize eight monophyletic families: Anacampserotaceae (Anacampseros, Grahamia, Talinopsis), Basellaceae, Cactaceae, Didiereaceae (incl. Calyptrotheca, Ceraria, Portulacaria), Halophytaceae, Montiaceae (incl. Hectorellaceae, Calandrinia, Cistanthe, Claytonia, Lewisia, Montia, Phemeranthus), Portulacaceae (Portulaca only), and Talinaceae (Amphipetalum, Talinella, Talinum). We provide a synopsis for this revised family classification with an identification key mainly based on habit and fruit characters, and family diagnoses with information on distribution, list of genera, with species number, and a brief discussion on phylogenetics and classification.
S2331	R. D. Stone;K. Andreasen	2010	The Afro-Madagascan genus Warneckea (Melastomataceae): molecular systematics and revised infrageneric classification	Taxon	59	1	83-92				Warneckea consists of shrubs and small trees endemic to tropical forests in Africa, Madagascar, and Mauritius. Phylogenetic analyses of sequence data from the transcribed spacers of nuclear ribosomal DNA (ETS, ITS) indicate that section Carnosa Jacq.-Fél. (1 sp., East-Africa and Madagascar) is a divergent element that is best treated at the subgeneric level. Its sister-group is subgenus Warneckea in which the analyses found three major lineages together forming a basal trichotomy. These three lineages represent section Strychnoidea (western and central Africa), section Warneckea (East-Africa, Madagascar, and Mauritius), and a third group with three West-African species (W. fascicularis, W. guineensis, and W. mangrovensis) comprising the newly proposed section Guineensea.
S2477	J. J. Morawetz;C. P. Randle;A. D. Wolfe	2010	Phylogenetic Relationships within the Tropical Clade of Orobanchaceae	Taxon	59	2	416-426				The tropical clade of Orobanchaceae contains approximately 40 genera, typically with fewer than 10 species each, and exhibits variation in floral morphology unmatched elsewhere within the family. Despite the economic importance of this clade, which contains three of four noxious parasitic crop weed genera within the family, it has been under-sampled in previous phylogenies. We tested the monophyly of the tropical clade and its major genera using DNA sequences from the nuclear (internal transcribed spacer) and chloroplast (rpl16, trnT-L) genomes. The tropical clade was strongly supported as monophyletic in all analyses, and four main clades were recovered. The earliest diverging lineage within the tropical clade is comprised of the shrubby genera Asepalum and Cyclocheilon, previously placed within Cyclocheilaceae. The atypical holoparasitic Alectra alba was shown to belong within the primarily holoparasitic Harveya, and the hemiparasitic Harveya obtusifolia was shown to belong to an otherwise holoparasitic lineage within Harveya. Both New World Melasma species were included here for the first time, and these were shown to be more closely related to the neotropical hemiparasitic Escobedia than the African Melasma lineage. These results support a previous study recognizing Nesogenes within the tropical clade of Orobanchaceae rather than the separate family Nesogenaceae.
S261	D. D. Ackerly;M. J. Donoghue	1998	Leaf size, sapling allometry, and Corner's rules: phylogeny and correlated evolution in maples (Acer)	The American Naturalist	152	6	767-791	10.1086/286208		tree life history; canopy architecture; independent contrasts; internal transcribed spacer; randomization methods; convergent evolution	We studied the evolution of leaf size, sapling canopy allometry and related traits in 17 Acer species growing in the understory of temperate deciduous forests, using parsimony methods, randomization tests, and independent contrasts calculated on a phylogeny inferred from nuclear ribosomal ITS sequences. Bivariate correlations and multivariate analyses indicated two independent suites of coevolving traits, and the results were robust over a range of alternative phylogenies. The first suite consisted of strong positive correlations among twig thickness, leaf size, inflorescence length, and branch spacing (Corner's rules). Seed size and mature height were also weakly correlated with these traits. The second suite reflected aspects of sapling crown allometry, including crown size, stem diameter, and total leaf area, which appear to be related to shade tolerance. There was a weak negative correlation between sapling crown size and mature height, but no correlation with leaf or seed size. Most correlations were similar in magnitude for ahistorical and independent contrasts analyses, and discrepancies between these two measures were greater in traits with lower levels of convergent evolution. The evolutionary correlations among twig, leaf, seed, inflorescence, and canopy dimensions emphasize the need for integrated theories of evolution and function of these disparate traits.
S1502	J. A. Slingsby;G. A. Verboom	2006	Phylogenetic relatedness limits co-occurrence at fine spatial scales: evidence from the schoenoid sedges (Cyperaceae: Schoeneae) of the Cape Floristic Region, South Africa	The American Naturalist							
S1753	B. R. Moore;M. J. Donoghue	2007	Correlates of diversification in the plant clade Dipsacales: Geographic movement and evolutionary innovation	The American Naturalist							We explore patterns of diversification in the plant clades Adoxaceae and Valerianaceae (within Dipsacales), evaluating correlations between biogeographic change (i.e., movements into new areas), morphological change (e.g., the origin of putative key innovations associated with vegetative and reproductive characters), and shifts in rates of diversification. Our findings indicate that rates of diversification in these plants tend to be less tightly correlated with the evolution of morphological innovations, but instead exhibit a pronounced correlation with movement into new geographic areas, particularly the dispersal of lineages into new mountainous regions. The interdependence among apparent novelties (arising from their nested phylogenetic distribution) and the correlation between morphological and biogeographic change suggests a complex history of diversification in Dipsacales. Overall, these findings highlight the importance of incorporating biogeographic history in studies of diversification rates and in the study of geographic gradients in species richness. Furthermore, these results argue against a simple deterministic relationship between dispersal and diversification: like other factors that may influence the probability of speciation and/or extinction, the impact of dispersal on diversification rates depends on being in the right place at the right time.
S567	M. Kennedy;H. G. Spencer	2000	Phylogeny, biogeography, and taxonomy of Australasian Teals	The Auk	117	1	154-163	10.1642/0004-8038(2000)117[0154:PBATOA]2.0.CO;2			The taxonomy of the Australasian teals has been particularly unstable. Australasian Grey Teal (Anas gracilis) and Chestnut Teal (A. castanea) are widely viewed as specifically distinct, but the taxonomy of the New Zealand teals remains unsettled. Because conservation status is affected by taxonomic rank, it is important to resolve the status of the rare subantarctic teals. To estimate phylogenetic relationships of teals, we sequenced three mitochondrial DNA genes (12S, and ATPase 6 and 8). The resultant phylogeny unequivocally groups the Chestnut Teal with the Grey Teal, rather than with the New Zealand teals as has traditionally been held (Fleming 1953). A greater level of sequence divergence occurred within the New Zealand teals than between the Grey and Chestnut teals. This diversity together with morphological and behavioral differences, implies that the New Zealand teals should be accorded specific status as A. aucklandica, A. nesiotis, and A. chlorotis. Although it is most likely that the teal that colonized the Auckland Islands and Campbell Islands originated in New Zealand, our data do not allow us to determine whether the ancestors of the Campbell Island Teal came from mainland New Zealand or the Auckland Islands. This uncertainty arises because, as our data show, the colonization events were separated by a short period of time.
S714	M. Kennedy;R. D. M. Page	2002	Seabird supertrees: Combining partial estimates of procellariiform phylogeny	The Auk	119	1	88-108	10.1642/0004-8038(2002)119[0088:SSCPEO]2.0.CO;2			The growing use of comparative methods to address evolutionary questions has generated an increased need for robust hypotheses of evolutionary relationships for a wide range of organisms. Where a phylogeny exists for a group, often more than one phylogeny will exist for that group, and it is uncommon that the same taxa are in each of the existing trees. The types of data used to generate evolutionary trees can also vary greatly, and thus combining data sets is often difficult or impossible. To address comparative questions for groups where multiple phylogenetic hypotheses already exist, we need to combine different hypotheses in a way that provides the best estimate of the phylogeny for that group. Here, we combine seven seabird phylogenies (based on behavioral, DNA–DNA hybridization, isozyme, life history, morphological, and sequence data) to generate a comprehensive supertree for the Procellariiformes using matrix representation with parsimony. This phylogeny contains 122 taxa and represents a conservative estimate of combined relationships presented in the original seven source trees. We compared the supertree with results of a combined sequence data supermatrix for 103 seabird taxa. Results of the two approaches are broadly concordant, but matrix representation with parsimony provides a more comprehensive and more conservative estimate of the phylogeny of the group because it is less influenced by the largest of the source studies (which uses a single, relatively quickly evolving gene). Genetic data sets that can be combined in a supermatrix approach are currently less likely to be available than phylogenies that can be combined using some form of supertree approach. Although there are limitations to both of those approaches, both would be simpler if all phylogenetic studies made both their data sets and trees they generate available through databases such as TREEBASE.
S807	K. M. Halanych;R. A. Feldman;R. C. Vrijenhoek	2001	Molecular evidence that Sclerolinum brattstromi is closely related to vestimentiferans, not frenulate pogonophorans (Siboglinidae, Annelida)	The Biological Bulletin	201	1	65-75		http://www.biolbull.org/cgi/content/abstract/201/1/65		Siboglinids, previously referred to as pogonophorans, have typically been divided into two groups, frenulates and vestimentiferans. Adults of these marine protostome worms lack a functional gut and harbor endosymbiotic bacteria. Frenulates usually live in deep, sedimented reducing environments, and vestimentiferans inhabit hydrothermal vents and sulfide-rich hydrocarbon seeps. Taxonomic literature has often treated frenulates and vestimentiferans as sister taxa. Sclerolinum has traditionally been thought to be a basal siboglinid that was originally regarded as a frenulate and later as a third lineage of siboglinids, Monilifera. Evidence from the 18S nuclear rDNA gene and the 16S mitochondrial rDNA gene presented here shows that Sclerolinum is the sister clade to vestimentiferans although it lacks the characteristic morphology (i.e., a vestimentum). The rDNA data confirm the contention that Sclerolinum is different from frenulates, and further supports the idea that siboglinid evolution has been driven by a trend toward increased habitat specialization. The evidence now available indicates that vestimentiferans lack the molecular diversity expected of a group that has been argued to have Silurian or possibly Cambrian origins.
S666	D. S. Hibbett;M. Binder	2001	Evolution of marine mushrooms	The Biological Bulletin	201	3	319-322		http://www.biolbull.org/cgi/content/short/201/3/319		Fungi make up one of the most diverse, ecologically important groups of eukaryotes. The vast majority of fungi are terrestrial, but the chytridiomycetes, a basal group of fungi, includes flagellated, unicellular, aquatic forms, and it is likely that this was the ancestral condition of the group (1). The more derived groups of fungi—zygomycetes, ascomycetes, and basidiomycetes—are all predominantly filamentous and terrestrial, and lack flagellated cells at any stage of the life cycle. Within the basidiomycetes, the most conspicuous group is the homobasidiomycetes, which includes about 13,000 described species of mushrooms and related forms. Eleven species of homobasidiomycetes (in eight genera) occur in marine or freshwater habitats. To resolve the relationships among terrestrial and aquatic homobasidiomycetes, we assembled a data set of ribosomal DNA (rDNA) sequences that includes 5 aquatic species and 40 terrestrial species. Phylogenetic trees obtained using parsimony and maximum likelihood (ML) methods suggest that there have been three or four independent transitions from terrestrial to aquatic habitats within the homobasidiomycetes. Three of the marine taxa in our data set are associated with mangroves, suggesting that these ecosystems provide a common evolutionary stepping-stone by which homobasidiomycetes have reinvaded aquatic habitats.
S2310	J. R. Starr;B. A. Ford	2009	Phylogeny and evolution in Cariceae (Cyperaceae): current knowledge and future directions	The Botanical Review	75	1	110-137	10.1007/s12229-008-9020-x			The goal of this study was to review the impact of DNA sequence analyses on our understanding of Cariceae phylogeny, classification and evolution. To explore character evolution, 105 taxa from four different studies were included in an nrDNA ITS + ETS 1f analysis of all recognized genera (Carex, Cymophyllus, Kobresia, Schoenoxiphium, Uncinia) and Carex subgenera (Carex, Psyllophora, Vignea, Vigneastra). As in previous analyses, four major Cariceae clades were recovered: (1) a Core Carex Clade (subg. Carex, Vigneastra, Psyllophora p.p); (2) A Vignea Clade (subg. Vignea, Psyllophora p.p.); (3) a Schoenoxiphium Clade (Schoenoxiphium, subg. Psyllophora p.p.), and (4) a Core Unispicate Clade (Uncinia, Kobresia, subg. Psyllophora p.p.). All studies provide strong support (86 100% BS) for the Core Carex and Vignea Clades, but only weak to moderate support (< 50% 78% BS) for the Core Unispicate and Schoenoxiphium Clades. The relationships of these groups are unresolved. Studies suggest that Carex is either paraphyletic with respect to all Cariceae genera or to all genera except Schoenoxiphium. Kobresia is a grade, but Uncinia and possibly Schoenoxiphium are monophyletic. The monotypic Cymophyllus is indistinct from Carex subg. Psyllophora species. Character analyses indicate that inflorescence proliferation and reduction have occurred in all major clades, and that the Cariceae s unisexual flowers have evolved from perfect flowers. The ancestor to Cariceae possessed a multispicate inflorescence with cladoprophylls and female spikelets with tristigmatic gynoecia and closed utricles. This morphology is most similar to extant Carex subg. Carex species, which contradicts the nearly unanimous assumption that the highly compound inflorescences of Schoenoxiphium are primitive. Since taxonomic sampling and statistical support for phylogenies have generally been poor, we advocate the temporary maintenance of the four traditional Carex subgenera with androgynous unispicate species placed within subg. Psyllophora and dioecious and gynaecandrous unispicate species distributed amongst subgenera Carex and Vignea. A collective effort focused on developing new nuclear markers, on increasing taxonomic and geographic sampling, and on studying development within the context of phylogeny, is needed to develop a phylogenetic classification of Cariceae.
S2x7x96c16c30c23	B. D. Mishler;P. H. Thrall;J. S. Hopple;E. de Luna;R. Vilgalys	1992	A molecular approach to the phylogeny of bryophytes: Cladistic analysis of chloroplast-encoded 16S and 23S ribosomal RNA genes	The Bryologist	95		172-180				As the most primitive living lineages of embryophytes, bryophytes are critical to an understanding of the evolution of the land flora. A relatively robust phylogenetic hypothesis exists, based on morphology, ultrastructure, and chemistry, in which the classical group bryophytes is not monophyletic. Instead, the mosses seem to be more closely related to the tracheophytes than to the hornworts or liverworts. However, details of these relationships remain unclear. In this paper we explore the usefulness of comparative molecular studies as a potential source of independent data to test and refine this cladogram. We have generated preliminary nucleotide sequence data from portions of the l 65 and 235 ribosomal RNA genes in the chloroplasts of 1l bryophytes selected from diverse groups. These data, even though they show considerable homoplasy, appear to be historically informative at this deep phylogenetic level since they support a cladogram that is identical to the morphological one. Future studies will expand the molecular comparisons by sequencing the rest of these two rRNA genes, as well as the protein-coding gene rbcL, for many more species.
S341	S. LaGreca	1999	A phylogenetic evaluation of the Ramalina americana chemotype complex (Lichenized Ascomycota, Ramalinaceae) based on rDNA ITS sequence data	The Bryologist	102	4	602-618		http://www.jstor.org/stable/3244250		The nature and significance of morphologically indistinguishable chemical races has been an active area of lichenological research for decades. This study uses a phylogenetic analysis of rDNA sequences to investigate whether the morphologically indistinguishable chemotypes of Ramalina americana are distinct species. Cladistic analysis of ITS sequences from 19 R. americana individuals (representing eight of the nine described chemotypes) and four outgroup Ramalina species reveals that R. americana comprises at least two cryptic, phylogenetic species. One, R. americana sensu stricto, is largely acid-deficient and grows in the northern half of the range of the complex (and at high elevations in the Southern Appalachian Mountains); the other, R. culbersoniorum sp. nov., encompasses most of the chemical diversity and occurs in the southern half of the range. Kimura 2-parameter genetic-distance estimates indicate that these two species are as different from each other as each is from outgroup Ramalina species. There is no meaningful resolution within either species. Among the outgroup Ramalina species, R. intermedia appears to be sister to the northern species, while R. fastigiata, the presumed sister group to the complex, forms an unresolved trichotomy with both the northern and southern species. R. sinensis, often assumed to be closely related to the complex, is only distantly related. The results of this study agree with previous studies of other lichens in that each chemotype does not represent a distinct species, nor are they all conspecific. Rather, the complex can be divided into two species, each consisting of multiple chemical races.
S525	S. Kroken;J. W. Taylor	2000	Phylogenetic species, reproductive mode, and specificity of Trebouxia forming lichens with the fungal genus Letharia	The Bryologist	103	4	645-660	10.1639/0007-2745(2000)103[0645:PSRMAS]2.0.CO;2	http://www.jstor.org/stable/3244330		The green algal symbionts of the lichenized fungus Letharia are identified as members of the morphospecies Trebouxia jamesii, based on ITS sequences that place them in a molecularly diverse clade with other lichen algae also identified as T. jamesii. However, based on additional sequence from a second locus, actin, T. jamesii is seen to consist of many phylogenetic species. A clade of six to seven closely related phylogenetic species of T. jamesii are symbiotic with five of the six phylogenetic species of Letharia. Within this broad level of specificity, there are also narrower patterns of specificity. For example, three cryptic species of T. jamesii were found only in two species of Letharia in California, a pattern that may be due either to biogeography, or to Letharia phylogenetically tracking Trebouxia. Allopatric Letharia vulpina has switched to a genetically distant phylogenetic species within the T. jamesii morphospecies, suggesting that habitat plays a role in specificity. One phylogenetic species of T. jamesii was found to have a recombining population structure, as two alleles of two loci were found in all four pairwise combinations among the haploid genotypes of that species. This result suggests that Trebouxia, a genus in which sexual structures have never been observed, is nevertheless recombining.
S836	V. Virtanen	2003	Phylogeny of the Bartramiaceae (Bryopsida) Based on Morphology and on rbcL, rps4, and trnL-trnF Sequence Data	The Bryologist	106	2	280-296	10.1639/0007-2745(2003)106[0280:potbbb]2.0.co;2			Parsimony analyses of 21 to 29 representatives of the family Bartramiaceae and of six outgroup taxa of Aulacomniaceae, Bryaceae, Plagiomniaceae, Meesiaceae, Rhizogoniaceae, and Timmiaceae were performed. Combined and separate analyses based on morphological data and three chloroplast loci (the genes rbcL and the rps4, and the trnL-trnF gene region) were carried out. Based on the combined analysis, the Bartramiaceae appear to be a monophyletic group including Anacolia, Bartramia, Breutelia, Conostomum, Fleischerobryum, Flowersia, Leiomela, Neosharpiella, Philonotis, and Plagiopus. The same result was obtained also from the analyses of rbcL and morphological data. Catoscopium is excluded from the family.
S1512	Y. Liu;Y. Jia;W. Wang;Z. D. Chen;Y. L. Qiu	2005	A Taxonomic Reassessment of Microdendron Inferred from Molecular and Morphological Evidence	The Bryologist	108		591-599				Microdendron Broth., an eastern Asian endemic genus, was initially described based mainly on the tree-like gametophytes, but there have been several conflicting taxonomic treatments. In this study, we sequenced three DNA regions of Microdendron: the nuclear 18S, and chloroplast rbcL and trnL-F. Phylogenetic analyses indicate that Microdendron is nested within Pogonatum, suggesting that the genus should not be recognized. Additionally we found an indel in the trnL intron region shared by the two genera, which also indicates the close relationship between them. Moreover, the probable allies of Microdendron sinense Broth. within Pogonatum are suggested based on detailed investigation under the scanning electron microscope.
S1519	L. L. Forrest;E. C. Davis;D. G. Long;B. J. Crandall-Stotler;A. Clark;M. Hollingsworth	2006	Unraveling the evolutionary history of the liverworts (Marchantiophyta): multiple taxa, genomes and analyses	The Bryologist	109	3	303-334	10.1639/0007-2745(2006)109[303:utehot]2.0.co;2			Nucleotide sequence data from three chloroplast genes (rbcL, rps4 and psbA), one nuclear gene (the ribosomal LSU) and one mitochondrial gene (nad5) were assembled for 173 species in 117 genera of liverworts, making this the largest molecular phylogeny of the group to date. Analyses of these data provide support for the monophyly of the liverworts, and for previously resolved backbone relationships within the Marchantiophyta. The earliest divergence involves the „simple thalloid‰ taxa of the Haplomitriaceae and Treubiaceae. A Blasiaceae/complex thalloid clade is resolved as sister to all remaining liverworts. The leafy liverworts do not resolve as monophyletic. The separation of the Aneuraceae/Metzgeriaceae from all other simple thalloids and their placement within the „ leafy‰ clade as sister to the enigmatic leafy genus Pleurozia, as suggested in earlier molecular phylogenies, is also supported by this far larger data set.
S2465	J. J. Engel;X. He-Nygrén	2010	Studies on Lophocoleaceae. XIX. The systematic identity of Cyanolophocolea, an intriguing liverwort from New Zealand and Australia, based on morphological and molecular evidence	The Bryologist	113	1	149-163	10.1639/0007-2745-113.1.149			Cyanolophocolea echinella is an intriguing species, possessing some character states characteristic of the genus Chiloscyphus, such as the ability to produce both male and female gametangia on leading shoots, while having other features that are generic characters of Heteroscyphus, namely presence of gametangia on short, abbreviated lateral-intercalary branches. Its systematic identity was here studied using morphological and DNA sequence data of the chloroplast gene regions of rbcL, rps4 and trnL-F. Thirty-seven exemplars including eight of Cyanolophocolea echinella, 27 of Lophocoleaceae and two of Plagiochilaceae were used for phylogenetic reconstruction using both maximum parsimony and Bayesian inference methods. Our analyses placed Cyanolophocolea echinella within Heteroscyphus with strong support.Heteroscyphus echinellus (Lindenb. & Gottsche) J.J.Engel & He-Nygrén is proposed and based on morphological variations two varieties var. echinellus and var. hyalinus J.J.Engel are recognized. A large indel (59 base pairs) and one substitution in the trnL intron region, and also one substitution in the intergenic spacer region were found in the trnL-F in two Cyanolophocolea echinella exemplars both with hyaline oil-bodies. This indicates rapid molecular evolution might have likely occurred within the species.
S2484	D. B. Schill;D. G. Long;L. L. Forrest	2010	A molecular phylogenetic study of Mannia (Marchantiophyta; Aytoniaceae) using chloroplast and nuclear markers	The Bryologist	113	1	164-179	10.1639/0007-2745-113.1.164			Reconstructions of phylogenetic relationships using chloroplast trnL-F and nuclear ribosomal LSU (or 26S) were based on 367 samples of Mannia and other Aytoniaceae, and two outgroup genera, Targionia hypophylla and Athalamia hyalina. Some Mannia species are represented several times, but from different countries. Maximum parsimony, maximum likelihood and Bayesian analyses were conducted on individual and combined molecular datasets. All phylogenetic tree topologies showed polytomies but suggest that Mannia has evolved from within its sister genus Asterella and that the genus falls into two main clades. Because Mannia is paraphyletic with Asterella gracilis nested with M. triandra and M. pilosa, Asterella gracilis is transferred to Mannia. The major differences between those genera are redefined. Based on molecular and morphological evidence Mannia is divided into two subgenera Mannia and Neesiella; Asterella subg. Graciles becomes a synonym of Mannia subg. Neesiella.
S2569	E. Sérusiaux;A. M. Brand;J. Motiejunaite;A. Orange;B. J. Coppins	2010	Lecidea doliiformis belongs to Micarea, Catillaria alba to Biatora, and Biatora ligni-mollis occurs in Western Europe	The Bryologist	113	2	333-344	10.1639/0007-2745-113.2.333			The taxonomic position of several European corticolous lichen species with conspicuous pycnidia and chlorococcoid photobiont is currently unsatisfactory and is here examined with maximum parsimony, maximum likelihood and Bayesian inferences using mtSSU sequences. Lecidea doliiformis is resolved as a member of the Micarea assimilata group and Catillaria alba as sister to the recently described Biatora ligni-mollis. Therefore, L. doliiformis is transferred to Micarea [M. doliiformis (Coppins & P. James) Coppins & Sérus.], and a new name is introduced for the transfer of C. alba into Biatora (B. veteranorum Coppins & Sérus. nom. nov.). Biatora ligni-mollis, recently described from primary forests in British Columbia (Canada), is shown to be a rare but widespread species in Western Europe (Belgium, France, Germany, Poland and Scotland) where it is not confined to undisturbed forests.
S565	J. P. Sullivan;S. Lavoue;C. D. Hopkins	2000	Molecular systematics of the African electric fishes (Mormyroidea: Teleostei) and a model for the evolution of their electric organs.	The Journal of Experimental Biology	203	4	665-683		http://jeb.biologists.org/cgi/content/abstract/203/4/665	Electric fish; mormyrid; electric organ; phylogeny; systematics; 12S and 16S rDNA; cytochrome b; RAG2	We present a new molecular phylogeny for 41 species of African mormyroid electric fishes derived from the 12S, 16S and cytochrome b genes and the nuclear RAG2 gene. From this, we reconstruct the evolution of the complex electric organs of these fishes. Phylogenetic results are generally concordant with earlier preliminary molecular studies of a smaller group of species and with the osteology-based classification of Taverne, which divides the group into the Gymnarchidae and the Mormyridae, with the latter including the subfamilies Petrocephalinae (Petrocephalus) and Mormyrinae (all remaining taxa). However, we find that several genera previously recognized by Taverne are non-monophyletic. Within the Mormyrinae, the genus Myomyrus is the sister group to all the remaining taxa. Other well-supported clades within this group are recovered. A reconstruction of electrocyte evolution on the basis of our best-supported topology suggests that electrocytes with penetrating stalks evolved once early in the history of the mormyrids followed by multiple paedomorphic reversals to electrocytes with non-penetrating stalks.  
S1017	T. M. King;M. Kennedy;G. P. Wallis	2003	Phylogeographic genetic analysis of the alpine weta, Hemideina maori: The evolution of a colour polymorphism and the origins of a hybrid zone	The Journal of the Royal Society of New Zealand	33		715-729				Body colour is an important distinguishing feature in a New Zealand alpine weta hybrid zone and is strongly correlated with mitochondrial DNA haplotype variation. To assess the broader geographic pattern of this association, an intraspecific phylogeny was generated using mtDNA sequence. Both parsimony and likelihood analyses separated the colour morphs into two clades. One grouped the Rock and Pillar Range yellow haplotypes with other Central Otago populations and the other grouped the black Rock and Pillar haplotypes as a monophyletic group. The black body colour seen in the south of the Rock and Pillar Range appears to have evolved multiple times across the species. Application of a molecular clock estimated that the Rock and Pillar yellow and black lineages were separated approximately 2 million years ago. The Rock and Pillar yellow lineage split from other Central Otago populations approximately 1 million years later, possibly the result of sequential range contraction and expansion.
S394	L. Myllys;K. Lohtander;M. Källersjö;A. Tehler	1999	Applicability of ITS data in Roccellaceae (Arthoniales, Euascomycetes) phylogeny	The Lichenologist	31	5	461-476	10.1006/lich.1999.0221			The ability of the internal transcribed spacers (ITS regions) of ribosomal DNA to resolve phylogenetic relationships within the euascomycetous order Arthoniales was investigated. The effect of alignment on phylogenetic hypotheses was evaluated. A data matrix from the ITS regions was constructed from 33 specimens representing 14 genera, including the outgroup Arthothelium spectabile. Six different alignments were analyzed cladistically using parsimony jackknifing. Most groups in the six trees were congruent and well supported under the different alignment settings. In a conservative analysis, where only unambiguously alignable regions were included, the resolution was low. These results indicate that the ITS regions contain phylogenetic structure, and all information, including the variable regions, should be utilized. A data matrix from the SSU rDNA sequences was constructed for the same taxa. The SSU rDNA tree was less resolved than the ITS trees. There were only minor conflicts between the two sources of data and an incongruence test confirmed that the ITS and SSU rDNA data matrices were not significantly incongruent. The six differently aligned data matrices generated from the ITS regions were each combined with the SSU rDNA data. Simultaneous analysis of the combined data sets is the best approach as it uses all available evidence. As with the ITS trees, most groups in the combined trees were identical and well supported. SSU rDNA provided resolution within one clade, otherwise the ITS sequences provided most of the signal in the combined analysis, both at the basal nodes and at the tips of the tree. Molecular data clearly indicates that the fruticose/crustose habits have evolved multiple times even in comparatively small groups as in the family Roccellaceae and that the characters such as fruticose-crustose may be over emphasized in morphological analyses.
S520	G. Helms;T. Friedl;G. Rambold;H. Mayrhofer	2001	Identification of photobionts from the lichen family Physciaceae using Algal-Specific ITS rDNA sequencing	The Lichenologist	33	1	73-86	10.1006/lich.2000.0298			The identity of photobionts from 20 species of the Physciaceae from different habitats and geographical regions has been determined by ITS rDNA sequence comparisons in order to estimate the diversity of photobionts within that lichen group, to detect patterns of specificity of mycobionts towards their photobionts and as a part of an ongoing study to investigate possible parallel cladogenesis of both symbionts. Algal-specific PCR primers have been used to determine the ITS rDNA sequences from DNA extractions of dried lichens that were up to 5 years old. Direct comparisons and phylogenetic analyses allowed the assignment of Physciaceae photobionts to four distinct clades in the photobiont ITS rDNA phylogeny. The results indicate a diversity within the genus Trebouxia Puymalyand Physciaceae photobionts that is higher than expected on the basis of morphology alone. Physciaceae photobionts belonged to 12 different ITS lineages of which 9 could unambiguously be assigned to 6 morphospecies of Trebouxia. The identity of the remaining three sequences was not clarified; they may represent new species. Specificity at the generic level was low as a whole range of photobiont species were found within a genus of Physciaceae and different ranges were detected. The photobionts of Physcia (Schreb.) Michaux were closely related and represented one morphospecies of Trebouxia, whereas the algal partners of Buellia De Not and Rinodina (Ach.) S.Gray were in distant lineages of the ITS phylogeny and from several Trebouxia morphospecies. Photobiont variation within a genus of Physciaceae may be due to phylogeny, geographical distance or that photobionts from neighboring lichens were taken (algal sharing). At the species level Physciaceae mycobionts seem to be rather selective and contained photobionts that were very closely related within one morphospecies of Trebouxia.
S538	S. LaGreca;H. T. Lumbsch	2001	No evidence from rDNA ITS sequence data for a placement of Ramalinora in the Ramalinaceae	The Lichenologist	33	2	172-176	10.1006/lich.2000.0304			
S824	H. T. Lumbsch;I. Schmitt	2001	Molecular data suggest that the lichen genus Pertusaria is not monophyletic	The Lichenologist	33	2	161-170	10.1006/lich.2000.0309			The phylogeny of the genus Pertusaria and allied taxa was investigated using nucleotide sequences of the LSU rRNA gene. Sequences from these regions of 15 pertusarialean fungi were aligned to those of three representatives of Agyriales used as outgroup. The alignment was analysed cladistically using maximum parsimony. The Pertusariaceae appear paraphyletic bearing the monophyletic Coccotremataceae on a clade including Ochrolechia and Pertusaria subg. Monomuratae, but monophyly of the family cannot be rejected. The genus Pertusaria is polyphyletic, with the subgenus Monomuratae more closely related to the Coccotremataceae and Ochrolechia than to taxa of the subgenera Pertusaria and Pionospora. Monophyly of the genus Pertusaria is rejected. The monophyly of the subgenera Pertusaria and Pionospora is also rejected. The distribution of selected characters in the Pertusariales is investigated and it is shown that apothecial form and spore wall number have changed parallel within Pertusaria. The Pertusaria-type ascus is plesiomorphic within the Pertusariaceae and thus cannot be used to circumscribe Pertusaria. The presence of chlorinated xanthones is restricted to Pertusaria s. str.
S825	R. S. Poulsen;I. Schmitt;U. Søchting;H. T. Lumbsch	2001	Molecular and morphological studies on the subantarctic genus Orceolina (Agyriaceae)	The Lichenologist	33	4	323-329	10.1006/lich.2001.0327			The subantarctic genus Orceolina is revised and two species are accepted, i.e.Orceolina antarctica (Müll. Arg.) R. S. Poulsen & Søchting comb. nov. and Orceolina kerguelensis (Tuck.) Hertel. Descriptions of the species are provided. In addition the phylogeny of the genus Orceolina and allied taxa was investigated using nucleotide sequences of the LSU rRNA gene. Sequences from these regions of nine agyrialean fungi were aligned to those of four representatives of Pertusariales used as outgroup. The alignment was analysed cladistically using maximum parsimony. The two Orceolina clustered together within the Agyriaceae. The placement in the family is supported by high bootstrap values and the Kishino-Hasegawa test. 
S550	I. Schmitt;M. I. Messuti;G. B. Feige;H. T. Lumbsch	2001	Molecular data support rejection of the generic concept in the Coccotremataceae (Ascomycota)	The Lichenologist	33	4	315-321	10.1006/lich.2001.0325			The Coccotremataceae is a small family including two genera:Coccotrema with a crustose, granulate to verrucose thallus and Lepolichen with terete lobes and rhizines. The generic concept based on this morphological difference was re-evaluated using three molecular markers, mt SSU rDNA, nu LSU rDNA, and the nu ITS region. The analysis of the ITS region does not provide sufficient resolution within the Coccotremataceae, while the other two data sets contradict the current generic concept. The mt SSU and nu LSU data sets and the combined analysis of the two data sets all place Lepolichen within Coccotrema. However, an alternative topology with monophyleticCoccotrema cannot be rejected when the ITS data set is included in the combined analyses. This shortcoming of the ITS data set can be overcome by the combined analysis of all three data sets, where monophyletic Coccotrema can be rejected using parametric bootstrapping, as in the mt SSU and nu LSU data sets (and combination thereof). It is proposed to reduceLepolichen into synonymy with Coccotrema. The correct name for the only species previously placed inLepolichen is Coccotrema coccophorum (Mont.) I. Schmitt, Messuti & Lumbsch. 
S758	L. Myllys;S. Stenroos;A. Thell	2002	New genes for phylogenetic studies of lichenized fungi: glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase and beta-tubulin genes	The Lichenologist	34	3	237-246			beta-tubulin gene; glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase gene; lichens; phylogenetic analysis	Primers for amplification and sequencing of partial glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (gpd) gene were designed for lichenized fungi. The 5′ gpd primer is most probably fungal specific, since a BLAST search in GenBank found identical sequences only from ascomycetous taxa, whereas the 3′ gpd primer was more universal. Utility of the gpd primers and previously designed beta-tubulin primers was tested in nine lichen taxa. Both the gpd and beta-tubulin primer pairs amplified in most of the taxa examined: the gpd primers generated a c. 1100 nucleotide fragment, whereas the PCR product obtained from the beta-tubulin primers was c. 900 nucleotides long. The gpd amplification products of Cladonia arbuscula and C. rangiferina were sequenced and both were found to contain three introns, the length of which varied between 49 to 83 nucleotides. To examine the applicability of gpd sequences in resolving relationships within Ascomycota, trees were calculated from 22 fungal gpd sequences obtained from GenBank together with the twoCladonia sequences using parsimony jackknifing. The gpd tree was compared with the SSU rDNA tree of the respective species (or genera). A similar analysis of the beta-tubulin gene was not performed, because only a few beta-tublin sequences from the same taxa were available in GenBank. The gpd tree was well resolved but in conflict with the SSU rDNA tree. In contrast to the SSU rDNA tree, the gpd tree did not support the monophyly of the Ascomycota. Analysis of the combined data set produced a tree very similar to that of the SSU rDNA data. However, the relationship of Lecanorales to the other orders remained unresolved. Even though gpd and beta-tubulin are highly conserved proteins, the third codon positions and introns are variable and both genes have the potential for inferring phylogenetic relationships at the lower taxonomic levels in the lichenized fungi. The two genes may be useful even below species level, depending on the species investigated.
S844	M. P. Martín;S. LaGreca;I. Schmitt;H. T. Lumbsch	2003	Molecular phylogeny of Diploschistes inferred from ITS sequence data	The Lichenologist	35		27-32	10.1006/lich.2002.0427			The phylogeny of the genus Diploschistes is investigated using nucleotide sequences of the nuclear ITS rDNA region (ITS1, ITS2 and 5.8S rDNA). Sequences of 22 Diploschistes species were aligned to those of six other species of Thelotremataceae, Graphis scripta, and Aspicilia cinerea, which was used as outgroup. The alignment was analysed cladistically using maximum parsimony. In the most parsimonious trees, Diploschistes is monophyletic, with D. ocellatus being a sister-group to the remaining Diploschistes spp. (= Diploschistes s. str.). A former cladistic analysis of morphological data suggested an evolutionary trend within the genus from perithecioid to urceolate ascomata. The present ITS data suggest the opposite: perithecioid ascomata are apparently an apomorphic character within the genus, with the actinostomus group forming a derived monophyletic clade. However, the topology within Diploschistes s.str. lacks strong bootstrap support.
S988	H. L. Andersen;S. Ekman	2004	Phylogeny of the Micareaceae inferred from nrSSU DNA sequences	The Lichenologist	36	1	27-35	10.1017/S0024282904013507			The phylogeny of the Micareaceae and the genus Micarea Fr. was studied using 39 nuclear small subunit ribosomal DNA sequences. Phylogenetic analyses were carried out using maximum parsimony, maximum likelihood, and Bayesian inference. A confidence set of trees was estimated using expected likelihood weights to investigate a series of hypotheses of monophyly. Tree topologies were very similar between methods and differed only in the placement of a few poorly supported branches. The results indicate that the Micareaceae in its current circumscription belongs in the Lecanorales, but that it is not monophyletic. Psilolechia, Micarea with a ìnon-micareoidî photobiont, Micarea sensu stricto and Byssoloma form a paraphyletic grade in this study. Micarea sensu stricto and Byssoloma (Pilocarpaceae) form a strongly supported monophyletic group, which constitutes the sister group to the Bacidiaceae. Scoliciosporum A. Massal has sometimes been considered close to Micarea, but no support was found here for that hypothesis.
S1090	S. Ott;M. Brinkmann;N. Wirtz;H. T. Lumbsch	2004	Mitochondrial and nuclear ribosomal DNA data do not support the separation of the Antartic lichens Umbilicaria kappenii and Umbilicaria antarctica as distinct species	The Lichenologist							The Antarctic endemics Umbilicaria kappenii and U. antarctica are morphologically close, but mainly distinguished by their reproductive strategies. Umbilicaria antarctica propagates by means of thalloconidia. U. kappenii lacks these, but exhibits a variety of asexual propagules: soredia, adventive lobes and thallyles. We have now employed molecular data from three gene regions to examine the phylogenetic relationships of these two morphotypes. The phylogeny of ten samples and four outgroup taxa (Umbilicaria decussata, U. krascheninnikovii, U. nylanderiana, U. umbilicarioides) was reconstructed using Bayesian and maximum parsimony analyses of a combined data set of nuclear ITS, nuclear LSU rDNA and mitochondrial LSU rDNA sequences. 42 new partial sequences of 14 specimens were generated. Our results indicate that all samples morphologically referred to U. antarctica and U. kappenii form a monophyletic group. A topology separating the two morphotypes as phylogenetic species is significantly rejected with the data set. It is proposed to place U. kappenii into synonymy with U. antarctica.
S1454	A. M. Casa;S. E. Mitchell;M. T. Hamblin;J. E. B. H Sun;A. H. Paterson;C. F. Aquadro;S. Kresovich	2005	Diversity and selection in sorghum: simultaneous analyses using simple sequence repeats (SSRs)	Theoretical Applied Genetics	111		23-30				Although molecular markers and DNA sequence data are now available for many crop species, our ability to identify genetic variation associated with functional or adaptive diversity is still limited. In this study, our aim was to quantify and characterize diversity in a panel of cultivated and wild sorghums (Sorghum bicolor), establish genetic relationships, and, simultaneously, identify selection signals that might be associated with sorghum domestication. We assayed 98 SSR loci distributed throughout the genome in a panel of 104 accessions comprising 73 landraces (i.e., cultivated lines) and 31 wild sorghums. Evaluation of SSR polymorphisms indicated that landraces retained 86% of the diversity observed in the wilds. The landraces and wilds were moderately differentiated (Fst=0.13) but there was little evidence of population differentiation among racial groups of cultivated sorghums (Fst=0.06). Neighbor-joining analysis showed that wild sorghums generally formed a distinct group, and about half the landraces tended to cluster by race. Overall, bootstrap support was low, indicating a history of gene flow among the various cultivated types or recent common ancestry. Statistical methods (Ewens-Watterson test for allele excess, lnRH, and Fst) for identifying genomic regions with patterns of variation consistent with selection gave significant results for 11 loci (~15% of the SSRs used in the final analysis). Interestingly, seven of these loci mapped in or near genomic regions associated with domestication-related QTLs (i.e., shattering, seed weight, and rhizomatousness). We anticipate that such population genetics-based statistical approaches will be useful for re-evaluating extant SSR data for mining interesting genomic regions from germplasm collections.
S282	G. E. Ball;D. R. Maddison	1987	Classification and evolutionary aspects of the species of the New World genus Amblygnathus Dejean, with description of Platymetopsis, new genus, and notes about selected species of Selenophorus Dejean (Coleoptera: Carabidae: Harpalini)	Transactions of the American Entomological Society	113		189-307				Descriptions and illustrations of structural features of adults, keys, and geographical distribution provide the basis for characterizing the 24 known species of the autochthonous and predominantly Neotropical genus, Amblygnathus Dejean, 1829 (type speciesóA. cepholotes Dejean, 1829). The 15 new species and two new subspecies are: A. interior (type localityóMexico, state of Sinaloa, Mazatlan); A. ponomensis (Panama, Canal Zone, Ancon); A. fricki (Panama, Canal Zone, Fort Clayton); A. woodruff) (Honduras, La Lima); A. tikol (Guatemala, Department of Del Peten, Tikal); A. whiteheodi (Mexico, Chiapas, north of Ocozocuautla); A. gilvipes gilvipes (Brazil, state of Bahia, Chapada); A.g. pernonus (Peru, Department of Huanuco, Rio Yuyapichis); A. xingu (Brazil, state of Mato Grosso, Parque Nacional Xingu); A. broziliensis (Brazil, Rio de Janeiro); A. geminotus (Surinam, Onverdacht, Billiton); A. dorlingtoni (Colombia, Magdalena, Rio Frio); A. bicolor (Brazil, state of Para, Santarem); A. gigos (Brazil, state of Mato Grosso, Vera); and A. reichordti (Brazil, state of Sao Paulo, Salesopolis). New synonyms are the following (junior synonyms in parentheses): A. mexiconus Bates, 1882 ( = Selenophorus delumbis Casey, 1914); and A. subtinctus (LeConte, 1866) ( = Selenophorus ongulotus Casey, 1914). Transfer of Amblygnothus obscuricornis Waterhouse, 1845 to Selenophorus Dejean, 1829 is confirmed, and A. ruficollis Putzeys, 1878 is also placed in Selenophorus. A South American species whose adults have a setose dorsal surface but resemble Amblygnothus in habitue and head structure, is described as a new species in a new monobasic genus: Plotymetopsis overoli (type localityóBrazil, state of Para, Tracuetua Braganca). The genus Plotymetopsis may be at the base of the New World Selenophorus group of genera, i.e., sister group of the ancestralstockof Athrostictus + Selenophorus branches, or it may represent a separate stock of Selenophori in the New World. Its relationships not being clear, this genus is classified incertoesedis in the Selenophorus group of genera. Based principally on a phylogenetic interpretation of character states of the male genitalia, the species of Amblygnothus are arrayed in groups and subgroups: 1., the Middle AmericanNorth American A. iripennis groupóA. iripennis subgroup (one species), A. mexiconus subgroup (one species), A. puncticollis subgroup (six species), and A. subtinctus subgroup (three species); 2., the South American A. suturolis groupóA. gilvipes subgroup (one species and two subspecies); A. suturolis subgroup (three species), and A. dorlingtoni subgroup (three species); and 3., the A. cepholotes groupóA. corvinus subgroup (one species), and A. cepholotes subgroup (five species). Similarities in structure of the male genitalia hypothesized to be synapotypic indicate that Amb/ygnothus is related to a complex of species of Selenophorus, designated as the laminate species group, on the basis of common possession of a lamina, and including the subgenus Celiomorphus Casey, 1914, the S. seriotoporus group, the S. omoroides group, and the monobasic S. ruficollis group. Using this complex as outgroup, the phylogeny of the species of Amblygnothus was reconstructed, indicating that the A. uipennis group is the sister taxon of the A. suturolis + A. cepholotes groups. A numerical analysis of the recoded data, using PAUP and MacClade computer programs, indicates that the reconstructed phylogeny based on mental analysis is only partially supported, and that there are many other equally likely reconstructions, some of which are more parsimonious. Examination of the consensus trees and one of the short trees most similar to the tree resulting from the mental analysis shows that the reasons for such rearrangements are themselves weak, or are contradicted by additional data used in the mental analysis but not in the numerical analysis. Consequently, the mental reconstruction is used as the basis for classifying the species of Amblygnothus and for evolutionary considerations, including the geographical history o the genus. The ecological aspects of the origin of Amblygnothus are postulated to have involved development of adaptations necessary for: 1, life in wet habitats (i.e., in leaf litter, in the vicinity of swamps and marshes); and 2, eating larger or harder seeds, or other tough plant tissue, an inference based on the enlarged heads of adults, with consequent increased area for origin of larger mandibular muscles. With these modif ications, the ancestral stock of Amblygnothus entered an ecological zone different from that of the laminate species of Selenophorus, whose members live in drier lowland habitats. One species, Amblygnothus interior, seems to have returned to a habitat more like that of the laminate species of Selenophorus, i.e., drier litter in forests, but in mountains rather than in lowlands. A reconstructed geographical history of Amblygnothus hypothesizes an early Tertiary vicariance event that separated in Central America the ancestor of the A. iripennis group from the South American ancestral stock of the A. suturolis + cepholotes groups. Correlation of geological events during the Tertiary Period with the reconstructed phylogeny and present geographical distribution patterns indicates that the ancestral stocks of the subgroups of the A. iripennis group were variously isolated in southeastern United States, on the Atlantic and Pacific versants of Middle America, and on what were then islands of Lower Central America. Isolation is postulated to have provided the interruption in genetic contact that was necessary to permit differentiation to occur. Following initial isolations, sympatry among the various stocks was achieved through subsequent dispersal of the species. The single Greater Antillean endemic species of Amblygnothus, A. puncticollis (Putzeys, 1878) is postulated to have reached the islands by flight of volant adults from the mainland of Nuclear Central America.
S397	F. Moonan;J. Molina;T. E. Mirkov	2000	Sugarcane yellowleaf virus: an emerging virus that has evolved by recombination between Polerovirus and Luteovirus ancestors	Virology	269	1	156-171	10.1006/viro.1999.0162			We have derived the genomic nucleotide sequence of a new virus, the sugarcane yellow leaf virus (ScYLV), and shown that it produces two subgenomic RNAs. The current genera of the Luteoviridae include the monopartite Luteovirus and Polerovirus genera, and the bipartite Enamovirus genus, that is represented in present by pea enation mosaic virus (PeMV). Utilizing the new ScYLV nucleotide sequence with existing Luteoviridae sequence information, we have utilized new analyses to identify homologous regions of the Luteoviridae genomes which have statistically significant altered nucleotide substitution ratios, and produce a reconstructed phylogeny of the Luteoviridae that indicates that the RNA1 of PeMV, and the genomes of ScYLV and SbDV, exhibit spatial phylogenetic variation (SPV) consistent with recombination events between Polerovirus and Luteovirus ancestors, that occurred after the evolutionary divergence of these progenitor groups. The reconstructed phylogeny confirms a contention that a continuum in the derived sequence evolution of the Luteoviridae has been established by intrafamilial as well as extrafamilial RNA recombination and expands the database of recombinant Luteoviridae genomes that are currently needed to resolve better defined means for generic discrimination in the Luteoviridae (D’Arcy and Mayo (1997) Arch. Virol. 142, 1285-7 ). The analyses of the nucleotide substitution ratios from a nucleotide alignment of Luteoviride genomes substantiates the hypothesis that hotspots for RNA recombination in this virus family are associated with the known sites for the transcriptions of subgenomic RNAs (Miller et al. (1995) Crit. Rev. Plant Sci. 14, 179 211), re-enforces the emphasis that specifically refined strategies should be required for safe use of Luteoviridae sequences in the production of transgene-mediated viral disease resistance, and provides new information that might be utilized to better design safer and more effective means to generate transgene-mediated host resistance.
S283	G. W. Rouse;K. Fauchald	1997	Cladistics and polychaetes	Zoologica Scripta	26	2	139-204	10.1111/j.1463-6409.1997.tb00412.x			A series of cladistic analyses assess the status and membership of the taxon Polychaeta. The available literature, and a review by Fauchald & Rouse (1997), on the 80 accepted families of the Polychaeta is used to develop characters and data matrices. As well as the polychaete families, non-polychaete taxa such as the Echiura, Euarthropoda, Onychophora, Pogonophora (as Frenulata and Vestimentifera), Clitellata, Aeolosomatidae and Potamodrilidae are included in the analyses. All trees are rooted using the Sipuncula as outgroup. Characters are based on features (where present) such as the prostomium, peristomium, antennae, palps, nuchal organs, parapodia, stomodaeum, segmental organ structure and distribution, circulation and chaetae. A number of analyses are performed involving different ways of coding and weighting the characters, as well as the number of taxa included. Transformation series are provided for several of these analyses. One of the analyses is chosen to provide a new classification. The Annelida is found to be monophyletic, though weakly supported, and comprises the Clitellata and Polychaeta. The Polychaeta is monophyletic only if taxa such as the Pogonophora, Aeolosomatidae and Potamodrilidae are included and is also weakly supported. The Pogonophora is reduced to the rank of family within the Polychaeta and reverts to the name Siboglinidae Caullery, 1914. The new classification does not use Linnaean categories and the Polychaeta comprises two clades, the Scolecida and Palpat
S512	G. Rouse	2000	Bias? What bias? The evolution of downstream larval-feeding in animals	Zoologica Scripta	29	3	213-236	10.1046/j.1463-6409.2000.00040.x			The homology of larval feeding modes has been a major element in recent discussions about animal phylogeny. 'Downstream feeding' is one of the two main larval feeding modes, and is usually equated to an opposed-band system involving ciliary bands called the prototroch and metatroch. Larval feeding in Spiralia is reviewed here and the homology hypothesis of downstream larval-feeding is expanded, encompassing any feeding involving the prototroch. It is often argued that the presence of planktotrophic larvae using downstream feeding is plesiomorphic among spiralian animals, and that there is a bias in transformations, such that feeding larvae tend to be lost rather than gained. These hypotheses are assessed in relation to the Spiralia, Trochozoa and particularly polychaete annelids. Cladistic parsimony analyses are performed based on data sets of Rouse & Fauchald (1997) and Rouse (1999), with an additional character based on downstream larval-feeding. Methods adopted to assess the possibility of a bias in transformations towards loss of downstream larval-feeding include: expanded primary homology arguments, character transformations favoring reversals, and polymorphic terminals coded as having downstream larval-feeding. These measures all tend to favor the possibility that downstream larval-feeding will be plesiomorphic, and tend to be lost rather than gained. Nevertheless, all analyses show that downstream larval-feeding is not plesiomorphic, and appears to have evolved multiple times. The results support a conclusion that the prototroch has become associated with feeding a number of times. Hypotheses of metazoan phylogeny that are predicated on the assumption that downstream-feeding larvae are plesiomorphic (e.g. Peterson et al. 1997) should be re-assessed.
S1325	I. Agnarsson	2005	A revision and phylogenetic analysis of the American ethicus and rupununi groups of Anelosimus (Araneae, Theridiidae)	Zoologica Scripta	34		189-314	10.1111/j.1463-6409.2005.00189.x			Two American species groups of the social spider genus Anelosimus are revised. The ethicus group contains six species from South America. Anelosimus rabus Levi, 1963, A. ethicus (Keyserling, 1884), and A. nigrescens (Keyserling, 1884) are redescribed, and A. nigrescens here removed from synonymy with A. ethicus. Three new species is described A. misiones sp. n. from southern Brazil and Argentina, and A. sumisolena sp. n. and A. inhandava sp. n. from southern Brazil. Anelosimus ethicus is reportedly either subsocial or solitary, while the behavior of the other species in the ethicus group is unknown. The rupununi group contains two quasisocial species, A. rupununi Levi, 1956, and A. lorenzo Fowler & Levi, 1979 from tropical South America that are redescribed. A parsimony analysis of morphological characters provides support for the monophyly of both groups. In the phylogeny subsociality optimizes to the base of Anelosimus, indicating that the common ancestor of the ethicus group was subsocial. Its members can thus be predicted to be subsocial, or secondarily solitary. Regardless, studying their biology is important to advance understanding on the evolution of sociality in spiders. Quasisociality arose de novo in the rupununi group, representing one of six to seven independent origins in theridiid spiders.
S1329	G. H. C. Vieira;G. R. Colli;S. N. Báo	2005	Phylogenetic relationships of corytophanid lizards (Iguania, Squamata, Reptilia) based on partitioned and total evidence analyses of sperm morphology, gross morphology, and DNA data	Zoologica Scripta							We conducted partitioned and combined Bayesian and parsimony phylogenetic analyses of corytophanid lizards (Iguania) using mtDNA, gross morphology, and sperm ultrastructure data sets. Bayesian and parsimony hypotheses showed little disagreement. The combined analysis, but not any of the partitioned ones, showed strong support for the monophyly of Corytophanidae and the three contained genera, Basiliscus, Corytophanes, and Laemanctus. Basiliscus is the sister taxon of a well-supported clade formed by Corytophanes and Laemanctus. The relationships of species within the genera Basiliscus and Corytophanes received weak support, regardless of the method used. We defend those relationships as feasible and open to further testing. Data derived from the ultrastructure of spermatozoa are potentially a good source of characters for systematic inferences of Iguania and its major lineages. The BPA results suggest a Central American origin of Corytophanidae and that some events allied to Central America formation were responsible for differentiation of the groups of Corytophanidae.
S1624	C. Ruta;A. Nygren;V. Rousset;P. Sundberg;A. Tillier;H. Wiklund;F. Pleijel	2006	Phylogeny of Hesionidae (Aciculata, Polychaeta), assessed from morphology, 18S rDNA, 28S rDNA, 16S rDNA and COI	Zoologica Scripta							We assess phylogenetic relationships within the polychaete family Hesionidae with morphological data together with nucleotide data from 18S rDNA, 28S rDNA, 16S rDNA and COI. Parsimony and Bayesian analyses are performed on two data sets, one based on a more restricted set of terminals with both morphological and molecular data (17 ingroup terminals), and one that includes additional taxa with morphological data only (25 ingroup terminals). The different sets of terminals yield fully congruent results, as does the parsimony and the Bayesian analyses. Our results indicate high levels of homoplasy in traditionally used morphological characters in the group, and that Hesioninae, Gyptini and Gyptis are non-monophyletic. Hesionini (mainly Hesione and Leocrates), Psamathini (mainly Hesiospina, Micropodarke, Nereimyra, Psamathe and Syllidia), Ophiodrominae (Gyptini and Ophiodromini) and Ophiodromini (mainly Heteropodarke, Ophiodromus and Podarkeopsis) are monophyletic and agree with previous classifications, and Hesionini is probably the sister to all other hesionids. The placements of the small hesionids capricornia and Lizardia, the hydrothermal vent taxa Hesiodeira and Hesiolyra, and the newly described Hesiobranchia, remain uncertain.
S1783	O. Torres-Carvajal	2007	Phylogeny and biogrography of a large radiation of Andean lizards (Iguania, Stenocercus)	Zoologica Scripta							With 61 species occurring mostly in the Andes and adjacent lowland areas, Stenocercus lizards represent one of the most widespread and well-represented Andean vertebrate groups. Phylogenetic relationships among species of Stenocercus are inferred using different datasets based on mitochondrial DNA sequence data of 35 species and morphological data of 59 species. Among morphological data, polymorphic and meristic/morphometric characters are coded under the frequency parsimony and gap-weighting methods, respectively, and the accuracy of these methods is tested. When both types of characters are included, the resulting tree topology is more similar to the topologies obtained from analyses of DNA sequence data than those topologies obtained after exclusion of one or both types of characters. The phylogenetic hypotheses inferred including 59 species of Stenocercus (dataset 1) and excluding those species for which DNA data were not available (dataset 2) are generally congruent with each other, as well as with previously published hypotheses. The most parsimonious tree obtained from analysis of dataset 2 is used in a dispersal-vicariance analysis to infer ancestral areas and major biogeographic events. Species of Stenocercus are divided into two major clades. Clade A has diversified mostly in the central Andes, with a few species in the northern Andes and one species in the southern Andes. Clade B is more widespread, with species in the northern, central, and southern Andes, as well as in the Atlantic lowlands and Amazon basin. The most recent common ancestor of Stenocercus is inferred to have occurred in the eastern cordillera of the central Andes. Given morphological similarity and altitudinal distribution of some species nested in a northern-Andes clade, as well as the relatively recent uplift of this Andean region, it is possible that species in this clade have diverged as recently as the mid-Pliocene.
S1914	L. M. Turner;N. G. Wilson	2007	Polyphyly across oceans: a molecular phylogeny of the Chromodorididae (Mollusca: Nudibranchia)	Zoologica Scripta							The Chromodorididae is a large and colourful family of nudibranch sea slugs distributed across the world‚s oceans. Most diversity is centred in the Indo-Pacific, but several genera are present in multiple ocean basins, or across regions separated by biogeographic barriers. The monophyly of these widespread genera had not been tested previously. We used 18S rDNA, 16S rDNA, and COI sequence data to generate a molecular phylogeny for this group. We recovered evidence of paraphyly or polyphyly in all of the widespread genera examined (Hypselodoris, Mexichromis, Chromodoris, Glossodoris). East Atlantic Hypselodoris and west Atlantic + east Pacific Mexichromis species were more closely related to each other than they were to their Indo-Pacific congeners. The addition of Southern Ocean species of Digidentis demonstrated an interesting alternative to this relationship, becoming the sister group for the east Atlantic Hypselodoris on the basis of 16S and 18S data, but not COI data. Sister group relationships were recovered for most monotypic or enigmatic genera. Ardeadoris is linked to Glossodoris, as is Diversidoris; Pectenodoris is sister to the Indo-Pacific Mexichromis clade, and Verconia is the sister to Noumea haliclona. Controversy surrounding the placement of the three most basal genera was only partially resolved. Using Actinocyclus to root the mitochondrial trees, Cadlinella was the unsupported sister to the Chromodorididae (excluding Cadlina), and Tyrinna occupied a relatively basal position, although this also did not receive significant statistical support. Adding nuclear 18S data gave support for Cadlina as the sister group to the rest of the Chromodorididae s. s.. Otherwise, like previous molecular studies, mitochondrial genes supported an alternative position for Cadlina (with other dorid genera).
S2245	S. H. Eo;O. R. P. Bininda-Emonds;J. P. Carroll	2009	A phylogenetic supertree of the fowls (Galloanserae, Aves)	Zoologica Scripta							The fowls (Anseriformes and Galliformes) comprise one of the major lineages of birds and occupy almost all biogeographic regions of the world. The group contains the most economically important of all bird species, each with a long history of domestication, and is an ideal model for studying ecological and evolutionary patterns. Yet, despite both the socio-economic and biological importance of fowls, the species-level relationships within this clade remain controversial. Here we used the supertree method matrix representation with parsimony to generate a robust estimate of species-level relationships of fowls. The supertree represents one of the most comprehensive estimates for the group to date, including 376 species (83.2 % of all species; all 162 Anseriformes and 214 Galliformes) and all but one genus. The supertree was well-resolved (81.1
S2519	A. Ravara;H. Wiklund;M. R. Cunha;F. Pleijel	2010	Phylogenetic relationships within Nephtyidae (Polychaeta, Annelida)	Zoologica Scripta	39	4	394-405	10.1111/j.1463-6409.2010.00424.x			We present the first phylogeny of nephtyids, a common, soft-bottom living polychaete family comprising five genera and over 100 species. Characters used to distinguish nephtyid genera are a matter of controversy and considerable confusion remains as to the generic delineations. The phylogeny is estimated with molecular data from the mitochondrial genes cytochrome oxidase I (COI) and 16S rDNA, the nuclear genes 18S rDNA and 28S rDNA, and morphological data. The results reveal two well-supported major clades, corresponding in part to the two main genera of the family, Aglaophamus and Nephtys. The species N. pulchra and N. australiensis are transferred to Aglaophamus, and new diagnoses for the genera are provided. Nephtys cornuta is sister to the remaining nephtyids and is referred to the new genus Bipalponephtys, together with N. danida. Micronephthys is sister to Nephtys, Dentinephtys may be nested within Nephtys, and Inermonephtys is of uncertain position. Dentinephtys may be a junior synonym of Nephtys, but is at present left as a separate genus in lack of strong support.
S287	D. C. Cannatella;L. Trueb	1988	Evolution of pipoid frogs: intergeneric relationships of the aquatic frog family Pipidae (Anura)	Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society	94	1	1-38	10.1111/j.1096-3642.1988.tb00880.x			The 27 species of the aquatic frog family Pipidae are currently arranged in four genera: Xrnopus ( 15 species), Hymenochirus (four species), and the poorly known genus Pseudhymenochirus (one species) occur in Africa; Pipa (seven species) is found in South America and lower Central America. Despite extensive work on the biology of Xrnopus from various disciplines, the evolutionary relationships of Xenopus to other pipids have not been resolved. Phylogenetic analyis of morphological features of pipid frogs indicates that, contrary to earlier opinions, Hymenochirus and Pipa are closest relatives (sister-groups); these genera are placed in the subfamily Pipinae. Also, the currently recognized species of Xenopus do not form a natural group; the species tropicalis and epitropicalis are more closely related to Hymenochirus + Pipa than to the remaining species of Xenopus. The two discordant species are transferred to the genus Silurana, which is relegated to the new subfamily Siluraninae; it is the sister-group of the Pipinae. The remaining species of Xenopus constitute a monophyletic group that is placed in the subfamily Xenopodinae as th
S294	C. S. Lee;B. A. McCool;J. L. Moore;D. M. Hillis;L. E. Gilbert	1992	Phylogenetic study of heliconiine butterflies based on morphology and restriction analysis of ribosomal RNA genes	Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society	106		17-31				Relationships of ten heliconiine butterflies (genera Dryas and Heliconius, family Nymphalidae) were elucidated by phylogenetic analysis of characters based on ribosomal DNA restriction site variation and morphology. Agraulis vanillae also a heliconiine, was used as the outgroup species. Although neither the morphological nor the molecular data unambiguously resolve relationships among the heliconiines, a combined analysis of both data sets results in a tree that is similar to traditional systematic arrangements and previous views of radiation in the group. Both pupal-mating and nonpupal-mating species group as clades in the combined analysis. However, the restriction site data alone do not support the monophyly of the pupal-mating clade, and the morphological data alone do not support the monophyly of the non-pupal-mating clade. Furthermore, relationships of H. melpomene, H. cydno and the silvaniform species depart from traditional arrangements based on morphology and reproductive compatibility experiments. All trees support the independent evolution of similar wing patterns of species previously suggested to be members of mimicry complexes. Several mimicry complexes appear to have a member in each of the two major monophyletic groups (pupal-mating and non-pupalmating clades). KEY WORDS: Heliconius butterflies - ribosomal DNA - restriction site polymorphism - phylogeny mimicry.
S309	D. Cundall;V. Wallach;D. A. Rossman	1993	The systematic relationships of the snake genus Anomochilus	Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society	109		275-299				Phylogenetic analysis of 38 skeletal characters, 12 muscular characters and 15 visceral characters in 17 major snake clades plus Anomochilus suggests that Anomochilus is the sister taxon of all other living alethinophidian snakes. However, skeletal, muscular and visceral character sets analysed separately or in pairs give four groups of nonconcordant tree topologies. Based on the cladogram derived from the total evidence, two families are erected to prevent the existing family Uropeltidae from becoming paraphyletic: Anomochilidae, for the Malaysian and Indonesian genus Anomochilus, and Cylindrophiidae, for the Sri Lankan, Southeast Asian and Indonesian genus Cylintrophis and the Upper Eocene fossil Eoanilius. ADDITIONAL KEY WORDS:óSerpentes - phylogeny - systematics - skeleton - visceral - muscles.
S10x11x97c16c23c53	N. Scharff;J. A. Coddington	1997	A phylogenetic analysis of the orb-weaving spider family Araneidae (Arachnida, Araneae)	Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society	120	4	355-434	10.1111/j.1096-3642.1997.tb01281.x		cladistics; methods; male genitalia; dimorphism; stabilimentum; Tctragnathidae; Mimetidae; Zygiella	We present the first cladistic analysis focused at the tribal and subfamily level of the orb-weaving spider family Araneidae. The data matrix of 82 characters scored for 57 araneid genera of 6 subfamilies and 19 tribes (and 13 genera from 8 outgroup families) resulted in 16 slightly different, most parsimonious trees. Successive weighting corroborated 62 of the 66 informative nodes on these cladograms; one is recommended as the “working” araneid phylogeny. The sister group of Araneidae is all other Araneoidea. Araneidae comprises two major clades: the subfamily Araneinae, and the “argiopoid” clade, which includes all other subfamilies and most tribes (((Gasteracanthinae, Caerostreae), (((Micratheninae, Xylethreae), Encyosaccus), (Eurycorminae, Arciinae)), Cyrtarachninae), ((Argiopinae, Cyrtophorinae), Arachnureae)). Cyrtarachneae and Mastophoreae are united in a new subfamily, Cyrtarachninae. The spiny orb-weavers alone (Gasteracanthinae and Micratheninae) are not monophyletic. The mimetid subfamily Arciinae and the “tetragnathid” genus Zygiella are araneids, but Nephila (and other tetragnathids) are not. On the preferred tree, web decorations (stabilimenta) evolved 9 times within 15 genera, and were lost once. The use of silk to subdue prey evolved once in cribellate and four times in ecribellate orb weavers. Sexual size dimorphism evolved once in nephilines, twice in araneids, and reverted to monomorphism five times. Evolution in other genitalic and somatic characters is also assessed; behavioral and spinneret features are most consistent (male genitalia, leg and prosomal features least consistent) on the phylogeny. KEYWORDS: cladistics methods male genitalia dimorphism stabilimentum Tetragnathidae Mimetidae Zygiella
S240	C. E. Griswold;J. A. Coddington;G. Hormiga;N. Scharff	1998	Phylogeny of the orb-web building spiders (Araneae, Orbiculariae: Deinopoidea, Araneoidea)	Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society	123	1	1-99	10.1111/j.1096-3642.1998.tb01290.x		evolution; webs; cladistics; systematics; comparative morphology; homology	This phylogenctic analysis of 31 exemplar taxa treats the 12 families of Araneoidea (Anapidae, Araneidae, Cyatholipidae, Linyphiidae, Mysmenidae, Nesticidae, Pimoidae, Symphytognathidae, Synotaxidae, Tetragnathidae, Theridiidae, and Theridiosomatidae). The data set comprises 93 characters: 23 from male genitalia, 3 from female genitalia, 18 from cephalothorax morphology, 6 trom abdomen morphology, 14 from limb morphology, 15 Eom the spinnerets, and 14 from web architecture and other behaviour. Criteria for tree choice were minimum length parsimony and parsimony under implied weights. The outgroup for Araneoidea is Deinopoidea (Deinopidae and Uloboridae). The preferred shortest tree specifies the relationships ((Uloboridae, Deinopidae) (Araneidae (Tetragnathidae ((Theridiosomatidae (Mysmenidae (Symphytognathidae, Anapidae))) ((Linyphiidae, Pimoidae) ((Theridiidae, Nesticidae) (Cyatholipidae, Synotaxidae))))))). The monophyly of Tetragnathidae (including metines and nephilines), the symphytognathoids, theridiid-nesticid lineage, and Synotaxidae are confirmed. Cyatholipidae are sister to Synotaxidae, not closely related to either the Araneidae or Linyphiidae, as previously suggested. Four new clades are proposed: the cyatholipoids (Cyatholipidae plus Synotaxidae), the 'spineless femur clade' (theridioid lineage plus cyatholipoids), the 'araneoid sheet web builders' (linyphioids plus the spineless femur clade), and the 'reduced piriform clade' (symphytognathoids plus araneoid sheet web builders). The results imply a cohcrcnt scenario for web evolution in which the monophyletic orb gives rise to the monophyletic araneoid sheet, which in turn gives rise to the gumfoot web of the theridiid-nesticid lineage. While the spinning complement of single pairs of glands does not change much over the evolution of the group, multiple sets of glands are dramatically reduced in number, implying that derived araneoids are incapable of spinning many silk fibers at the same time.
S535	V. S. Smith	2001	Avian Louse Phylogeny (Phthiraptera: Ischnocera): A cladistic study based on morphology	Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society	132	1	81-144	10.1111/j.1096-3642.2001.tb02272.x		lice; Phthiraptera; Ischnocera; ontogeny; bird phylogeny; coevolution; congruence	The louse suborder Ischnocera (Phthiraptera) contains 3,060 currently described species from over 150 genera. These lice are permanent obligatory ectoparasites of a diverse selection of birds and mammals with a worldwide distribution. Historically, they have played a major role in the development of our ideas on coevolution, and species hosted by mammals have been used extensively as model organisms for the study of cospeciation. In contrast, avian taxa comprising 90% of ischnoceran species have been neglected due to a lack of data on their wider systematics. A comparative study based on the adult and nymphal instar morphology of avian lice yielded 138 characters from 56 species (51 genera), all of which are illustrated or discussed here for the first time. A further five outgroup taxa were examined from the mammalian ischnoceran family Trichodectidae. Phylogenetic analyses of these data produced three most parsimonious cladograms, the strict consensus of which is highly resolved and broadly consistent with previous classifications. Morphological character variation is extensive, and nymphal character traits are useful in identifying instances of convergent evolution in adult morphology. The role of ontogeny in the development of the major character complexes of the head and abdomen is discussed, and its implications for further work on the phylogeny of avian Ischnocera is considered. Comparison with host taxonomy reveals a series of complex host-parasite associations that do not support a hypothesis of strict one to one cospeciation. However, extrapolation of these associations is compromised by the low sample size. The role of niche specialisation to explain the presence of multiple unrelated lineages on the same host taxon is considered.
S739	I. K. Marshall	2003	A morphological phylogeny for four families of amblyceran lice (Phthiraptera: Amblycera: Menoponidae, Boopiidae, Laemobothriidae, Ricinidae)	Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society	138	1	39-82	10.1046/j.1096-3642.2003.00057.x		cladistics; coevolution; cospeciation; host–parasite systems; insect phylogeny; louse; morphology	The suborder Amblycera (Insecta: Phthiraptera) comprises seven recognized families of parasitic lice. Three of these families (the Menoponidae, Laemobothriidae and Ricinidae) are present on a wide range of avian hosts. The four remaining families are restricted to a small section of mammals (the Boopiidae are parasites of Australian and New Guinean marsupials, and the Gyropidae, Trimenoponidae and Abrocomophagidae parasitize South and Central American rodents). This study uses a morphological approach to examine the evolutionary relationships between the genera from four amblyceran families: the Menoponidae, Boopiidae, Laemobothriidae and Ricinidae. Genera are represented by exemplars and a total of 44 louse taxa and one outgroup taxon were included. A cladistic analysis of 147 unordered characters recovered six equally parsimonious trees. Bootstrap, jackknife and Bremer support analyses were undertaken to assess the level of support for each resolved node in the strict consensus topology. Strong support was found for deep branch relationships between the families and in some cases for supra-generic groupings within families. The clades present in the strict consensus tree are discussed with reference to supra-generic and interfamily relationships, character choice, morphological convergence and host distribution. This study is the first phylogeny presented solely for amblyceran genera.
S1311	C. Bleidorn	2005	Phylogenetic Relationships and Evolution of Orbiniidae (Annelida, Polychaeta) based on molecular data	Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society	144		59-73				The phylogenetic relationships of orbiniid taxa were reconstructed based on sequence data of the mitochondrial 16S rRNA gene and the nuclear 18S rRNA gene. Both genes were analysed separately and in combination using Maximum Likelihood, Bayesian inference, and Maximum Parsimony. Regardless the method used a clade consisting of the investigated Orbiniidae, Methanoaricia dendrobranchiata, and Questa is strongly supported by the 18S dataset. The presence of camarated chaetae in all these taxa supports the monophyly of this clade from the morphological side. The analysis of the combined dataset suggests an inclusion of Methanoaricia dendrobranchiata in the Orbiniidae with a close relationship to species of Orbinia and Phylo, rather than as being the sister taxon of all other orbiniids. Evidence is given for a paraphyletic status of Leitoscoloplos, Naineris, Orbinia, Phylo and Scoloplos, which represent the most species rich genera of the Orbiniidae. Thus it can be reasoned that the morphological characters which are presently used for genus diagnosis are not informative for cladistic analysis. No support is found for the hypotheses that taxa of the Protoariciinae represent juveniles of Orbiniinae, instead in the case of Protoaricia oerstedi strong support for a progenetic origin is given.
S1309	D. R. Uit de Weerd;E. Gittenberger	2005	Towards a monophyletic genus Albinaria: the first molecular study into the phylogenetic position of eastern Albinaria species	Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society	143		531-542				Recent molecular phylogenetic studies of the terrestrial snail genus Albinaria have caused a radical reassessment of its taxonomy. These studies, however, were limited to western Mediterranean species. This study examines mitochondrial 12S sequences and nuclear ITS1&2 sequences of both eastern and western species, and demonstrates that Albinaria, in its most recent definition, is not monophyletic. Both molecular datasets place 'Albinaria' hedenborgi from Lebanon in a well-supported clade with species of the genus Cristataria, distributed southeast of the vicariant range of Albinaria. The remaining species from Cyprus, Turkey and Greece, constitute a well-supported monophyletic group. These two clades form geographic clusters, whereas Albinaria in the current definition - including 'A.' hedenborgi- has a disjunct distribution. 'Albinaria' hedenborgi should therefore be classified with Cristataria, together with the morphologically similar and geographically close 'A.' nadimi.
S2372	G. Jansen;R. Savolainen	2010	Molecular phylogeny of the ant tribe Myrmicini (Hymenoptera: Formicidae)	Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society	160	3	482-495	10.1111/j.1096-3642.2009.00604.x			The interrelationships within ant subfamilies remain elusive, despite the recent establishment of the phylogeny of the major ant lineages. The tribe Myrmicini belongs to the subfamily Myrmicinae and groups morphologically unspecialised genera. Previous research has struggled with defining Myrmicini, leading to considerable taxonomic instability. Previous molecular studies have suggested non-monophyly of Myrmicini but they have been based on limited taxon sampling. We investigated the composition of Myrmicini with phylogenetic analyses of an enlarged set of taxa, using DNA sequences of seven gene fragments taken from representatives of six of the seven genera (Eutetramorium, Huberia, Hylomyrma, Myrmica, Manica and Pogonomyrmex). Our results demonstrate the invalidity of Myrmicini as currently defined. We recovered sister-group relationships between the genera Myrmica and Manica, and between Pogonomyrmex and Hylomyrma. This study illustrates that to understand the phylogeny of over 6000 myrmicine species, comprehensive taxon sampling and DNA sequencing are an absolute requisite
S2378	J. J. Sato;S. P. Yasuda;T. Hosoda	2009	Genetic diversity of the Japanese marten (Martes melampus) and its implications for the conservation unit	Zoological Science	26	7	457-466	10.2108/zsj.26.457			Molecular phylogenetic analyses of combined mitochondrial DNA sequences (2,814 bp; cytochrome b gene, displacement loop region, and NADH dehydrogenase subunit 2 gene) identified nine groups among 49 individual Japanese martens, Martes melampus, collected from diverse areas in Japan. The grouping was not correlated with winter coat color, but was consistent with geography. In particular, the monophyly of 29 individuals of Tsushima martens, M. m. tsuensis, was supported by strong clade support and topological tests. Haplotype and nucleotide diversities were much lower for the Tsushima population than any other population in the Japanese main islands. In addition, analyses of the heterozygosity of the nuclear growth hormone receptor gene sequences (654 bp) showed genetic homogeneity in the Tsushima population. This evidence supports the view that it is Tsushima martens f long history of isolation on a small island that is responsible for their genetic distinctiveness and uniformity, validating the Tsushima population as an evolutionarily significant unit.
S1439	M. J. Cavalcanti	2006	A phylogenetic supertree of the hammerhead sharks (Carcharhiniformes, Sphyrnidae)	Zoological Studies							In this study, five hammerhead shark phylogenies (based on morphological, isozyme, and mtDNA sequence data) were combined to generate a complete, well-resolved composite phylogeny for the Sphyrnidae using matrix representation with parsimony. The resulting supertree contains all the 8 known sphynid species and represents the best estimate of combined relationships presented in the original five source trees. The supertree will provide a useful framework for phylogenetic comparative studies of sphyrnid evolution, ecology, and biogeography.
S1953	D. J. Colgan;P. A. Hutchings;E. Beacham	2007	Multi-gene analyses of phylogenetic relationships between Mollusca, Annelida and Arthropoda	Zoological Studies							The current understanding of metazoan relationships is largely based on analyses of 18S rRNA. In this paper, DNA sequence data from two segments of 28S rRNA, cytochrome c oxidase subunit I, histone H3 and U2 snRNA are compiled and used to test the phylogenetic relationships between Mollusca, Annelida and Arthropoda. 18S rRNA data were included in the compilations for comparison. The analyses were especially directed to testing the implication of the Eutrochozoa hypothesis that Annelida and Mollusca are more closely related than Annelida and Arthropoda and at determining whether, in contrast to analyses using only18S rRNA, the addition of data from other genes find these phyla monophyletic. New data and available sequences were compiled for up to 49 molluscs, 33 annelids, 22 arthropods, and 27 taxa from fifteen other metazoan phyla. Porifera, Ctenophora and Cnidaria were used as the outgroup. Annelida, Mollusca, Entoprocta, Phoronida, Nemertea, Brachiopoda and Sipuncula (that is, all included Lophotrochozoa except Bryozoa) formed a monophyletic clade with maximum likelihood bootstrap support of 81% and Bayesian posterior probability of 0.66 when all data were analysed. The clade was also seen (but included one arthropod, the symphylan) when only genes other than 18S rRNA were analysed. Two Mollusca with long branch-lengths (Nautilus and Philippia) were removed from Lophotrochozoa in maximum parsimony analyses of all data. The Ecdysozoa (Kinorchyncha, Priapula, Nematoda, Onychophora, Tardigrada and Arthropoda) were included in a clade with Chaetognatha (maximum likelihood support of 80%, Bayesian probability of 0.57) in the total data. This clade excluding the symphylan had Bayesian probability of 0.66 when 18S r DNA data were excluded. The reciprocal separation of Annelida and Mollusca was generally supported where this could be resolved. The monophyly of Anelida was contradicted only by the inclusion of Sipuncula and Brachiopoda and the exclusion of Owenia. Molluscan monophyly was contradicted by the anomalous placement of Nautilus and/or Philippia but these taxa were never placed in Annelida.
S1028	J. A. Sánchez;S. D. Cairns	2004	An unusual new gorgonian coral (Anthozoa: Octocorallia) from the Aleutian Islands, Alaska	Zoologische Mededelingen	78	1-16	265-274		http://www.repository.naturalis.nl/document/43174		Despite the abundance and ecological importance of octocorals in Alaskan waters, most of the species in this assemblage remain unidentified and/or undescribed. One of the largest and most abundant species from the Aleutian Islands found at depths ranging between 125 and 512 m is a new and very unusual gorgonian coral. It has stout upright colonies that are laterally branched, with thick, more or less clavate terminal branches. Its major distinguishing characteristic is its possession of tiny sclerites with stubby double heads, which occur in the outermost coenenchyme. Another significant character is its oval capstans with elaborate ornamentation. The gorgonian is described as Alaskagorgia aleutiana new genus and species (Cnidaria: Octocorallia: Holaxonia: Plexauridae). It is described and assigned to Plexauridae because of the affinity of DNA sequences (1337 bp mtDNA: ND2 and MSH1) of A. aleutiana with other plexaurid corals, even though the predominant coenenchymal sclerites are somewhat smaller and different than is usual in plexaurid genera.
S1348	T. H. Struck;G. Purschke	2005	The Sister Group Relationship of Aeolosomatidae and Potamodrilidae (Annelida: "Polychaeta") ÀÜ A Molecular Phylogenetic Approach Based on 18S rDNA and Cytochrome Oxidase I	Zoologischer Anzeiger	243		281-293				Aeolosomatidae and Potamodrilidae are small meiofauna annelids of apparently simple organization and uncertain phylogenetic position. Potamodrilidae was regarded either as a subtaxon of Aeolosomatidae, united with them as Aphanoneura, or entirely unrelated to Aeolosomatidae. Moreover, the groups have been placed in various positions within Annelida: as sister group of Clitellata, as a highly derived clitellate taxon, or excluded from Clitellata and not closely related to them due to great morphological differences. Although molecular studies give strong support for the exclusion of these two taxa from Clitellata their questionable sister group relationship to each other has not been addressed specifically. In the present study sequences of the nuclear 18S rDNA and the mitochondrial Cytochrome Oxidase I gene were used for addressing this question. In addition to the available nuclear 18S rDNA sequences, partial sequences of Cytochrome Oxidase I of <I>Rheomorpha neiswestnovae</I> (Lastochkin, 1935) and <I>Potamodrilus fluviatilis</I> Lastochkin, 1935 along with other polychaete taxa were determined. Combined analyses of these two genes were conducted using Maximum Parsimony and Bayesian Analysis. A sister group relationship of Aeolosomatidae and Potamodrilidae is significantly supported in all analyses. As in previous studies a relationship to Clitellata is not supported but the phylogenetic position of both Aeolosomatidae and Clitellata within the polychaetes remains enigmatic.
S2532	B. Kokshoorn;I. Erkelens;M. van Schoor;E. Gittenberger	2010	Waves of dispersal in island-hopping Chondrina species (Gastropoda, Pulmonata, Chondrinidae)	Zoologischer Anzeiger	249	2	71-79	10.1016/j.jcz.2010.02.001			The aim of this study was to unravel the historical biogeography of the speciose land snail genus Chondrina. To this end phylogenetic hypotheses were tested using mitochondrial DNA sequence data. Mitochondrial DNA sequences of the Cytochrome Oxidase subunit I region were obtained for 89 individuals, representing just over 70% of the extant Chondrina species. The extent of molecular genetic diversity and phylogeographical patterns were investigated by using neighbour joining, parsimony and bayesian methods for phylogeny reconstructions. The resulting data were used to infer historical biogeographical patterns for the genus Chondrina. The three phylogenetic methods yielded congruent topologies for the phylogeny reconstruction. Six clades were identified, each of which with at least one taxon that is known from the Iberian peninsula. The most parsimonious scenario indicates at least three waves of dispersal out of the Iberian peninsula into the North and East of Europe and Northern Africa. The phylogenetic relationships combined with the distributional patterns of the various species, indicate that only vicariance events cannot explain the actual situation. Apparently, separate waves of dispersal and subsequent speciation occurred, each time starting from the southwestern part of the present generic range. Until recently, this was obscured by repetitive cases of parallel or convergent evolution in shell characters, as became evident with the use of molecular methods.
S1712	U. Fritz;O. R. P. Bininda-Emonds	2007	When genes meet nomenclature: tortoise phylogeny and the shifting generic concepts of Testudo and Geochelone	Zoology	110	4	298-307	10.1016/j.zool.2007.02.003			We used a five-gene data set (mtDNA: 12S rRNA, 16S rRNA, cyt-b; nDNA: Cmos, Rag2) comprising approximately two-thirds of all extant testudinid species and, for the first time, including all five Testudo species to investigate the question of whether all western Palaearctic testudinids are monophyletic. Further, we examined whether the recently suggested allocation of the African Geochelone pardalis in the otherwise exclusively South African genus Psammobates and of the Malagasy G. yniphora in the monotypic genus Angonoka is justified in the face of considerable morphological evidence against such placements. Our phylogenetic analyses do not support the paraphyly and generic break-up of Testudo, as suggested by previous papers using a smaller taxon-sampling and mtDNA data only. We propose a continued usage of the generic name Testudo for all five western Palaearctic tortoise species. Within Testudo, two monophyletic subclades are present, one containing T. hermanni + T. horsfieldii, and the other comprising ((T. kleinmanni + T. marginata) + T. graeca). Nomenclaturally, we argue that Eurotestudo Lapparent de Broin et al., 2006, which was recently erected with the type species T. hermanni, is an objective junior synonym of Chersine Merrem, 1820 and Medaestia Wussow, 1916. Recognition of a monotypic genus Angonoka for G. yniphora is unwarranted according to both our re-analysis of sequence data and morphological data. Acknowledging the strong morphological similarity between G. yniphora and G. radiata, we suggest placing both species into the genus Astrochelys. Although sequence data for only one of the three Psammobates species was available for analysis, there is currently no cause to challenge the monophyly of this genus as established on the basis of morphological evidence. Thus, we hypothesize that G. pardalis is sister to a monophyletic Psammobates. In light of the clear morphological gap between G. pardalis and Psammobates species, the recognition of a distinct genus Stigmochelys for the former seems justified.
S2227	S. A. Price;O. R. P. Bininda-Emonds	2008	A comprehensive phylogeny of extant horses, rhinos and tapirs (Perissodactyla) through data combination	Zoosystematics and Evolution							We present the first phylogenies to include all extant species of Perissodactyla (odd-toed hoofed mammals) and the recently extinct quagga (Equus quagga). Two independent data sets were examined; one based on multiple genes and analyzed using both supertree and supermatrix approaches, and a second being a supertree constructed from trees collected from the scientific literature. All methods broadly confirmed the traditional view of perissodactyl interfamily relationships, with Equidae (= Hippomorpha) forming the sister-group to the clade Rhinocerotidae + Tapiridae (= Ceratomorpha). The contentious affinity of the Sumatran rhino (Dicerorhinus sumatrensis) is resolved in favour of it forming a clade with the two Asian rhinos (genus Rhinoceros). However, no data set or tree-building method managed to satisfactorily resolve the historically contentious relationships among extant equids; little agreement appears among the different trees for this group. In general, both the supertree and supermatrix approaches performed equally well, but both were hindered by the current paucity of data (e.g. no single gene has been sequenced to date for all 17 species) and its patchy distribution within Equidae. More data, both molecular and morphological, are required for all species to resolve the poorly supported nodes.
S1293	J. Persson;F. Pleijel	2005	On the phylogenetic relationships of Axiokebuita, Travisia and Scalibregmatidae (Polychaeta)	Zootaxa							We provide a description of newly collected specimens of Axiokebuita Pocklington & Fournier from Norway, previously known only from east Canada and the Antarctic. Due to delineation problems between the only two described species, A. minuta (Hartman) and A. millsi Pocklington & Fournier, these new specimens cannot unambiguously be referred to either species. Previously unnoticed adhesive papillae on the pygidium are present in both species and may constitute an apomorphy for Axiokebuita. The taxon lacks many morphological features otherwise characteristic for scalibregmatids, and to assess its affinities we present 18S rDNA and 28S rDNA-based analyses together with six other scalibregmatids and twenty other polychaetes. A nemertean is used as outgroup. All analyses support that Axiokebuita is a scalibregmatid. Furthermore, Travisia Johnston, traditionally referred to the Opheliidae, is nested within the scalibregmatids, as sister to Neolipobranchius Hartman & Fauchald. Arenicolidae and Maldanidae may constitute the sister group of scalibregmatids
S1284	J. A. Sanchez	2005	Systematics of the bubblegum corals (Cnidaria: Octocorallia: Paragorgiidae) with description of new species from New Zealand and the Eastern Pacific	Zootaxa							Bubblegum corals, Paragorgiidae, are among the largest and most ecologically important benthic sessile deep-water organisms harboring hundreds of associated crustaceans. However, no recent reviews of their diversity and systematics are yet available, despite the recent increase in the sampling and fishing of deep-water habitats. This study covered 17 Paragorgiidae species. There were only five previously known species for Paragorgia (P. arborea [Linnaeus], P. johnsoni Gray, P. splendens Thomson & Henderson, P. regalis Nutting [=dendroides Bayer], and P. coralloides Bayer) and just one of Sibogagorgia (S. weberi Stiasny). Eleven new species are described here comprising 9 Paragorgia spp. (P. alisonae, P. kaupeka, P. maunga, P. aotearoa, P. wahine, P. whero, P. yutlinux, P. stephencairnsi, and P. tapachtli) and 2 Sibogagorgia spp. (S. tautahi and S. dennisgordoni). This study also uncovered two areas of endemism for bubblegum corals corresponding to New Zealand and the Eastern Pacific (Mexico to Canada). New Zealand has 6 likely endemic species of Paragorgia (P. alisonae, P. kaupeka, P. maunga, P. aotearoa, P. whero, and P. wahine) and the two new species of Sibogagorgia whereas P. yutlinux, P. stephencairnsi, and P. tapachtli were collected in the Eastern Pacific. There seem to be a few trans-Pacific species such as P. regalis, and likewise in the Atlantic with P. johnsoni, but it is clear that no other species is as cosmopolitan as P. arborea with discontinuous but bi-polar distribution. There are cases of morphological sister species such as P. johnsoni and P. aotearoa that correspond to the Atlantic and Pacific respectively, but the phylogenetic relationships of the remaining species indicate that most paragorgiid diversity and speciation took place in the Indo-Pacific region, as suggested by a number of sympatric species. Surface sclerites, radiates, exhibit a great deal of variation under the Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM), providing a number of characters for phylogenetic reconstruction, including three kinds of radial ornamentation and several types of surfaces and sub-ornamentation at the ultrastructure level. The three most parsimonious trees of equal length, using morphological characters, showed P. arborea as basal to the rest of the Paragorgia species (using Sibogagorgia as outgroup), which were divided in two clades. One clade includes the species with asymmetrical surface sclerites with some radial ornaments larger or different than others ([P. maunga -[P. coralloides-P.tapachtli-P. regalis-P. kaupeka]]). In this clade, P. maunga conserved the basal position in the most parsimonious trees whereas relationships among the other species were not consensual. The other clade comprised species with symmetrical surface sclerites ([[P. splendens-P. wahine] P. alisonae-[P. yutlinux-P. stephencairnsi]-P. johnsoni-P. aotearoa]). P. splendens-P. wahine-P.whero and P. yutlinux-P. stephencairnsi maintained their sister relationships respectively in all most-parsimonious trees but no consensual relationships with respect to and among the other species of the clade. Complete descriptions of described and new species using SEM, species comparisons, character states, and a species key are also provided in this paper.
S1555	W. P. Maddison;K. M. Needham	2006	Lapsiines and hisponines as phylogenetically basal salticid spiders (Araneae: Salticidae)	Zootaxa	1255		37-55				Increased phylogenetic resolution of the basal lineages of salticid spiders will help us understand their early evolution and provide better outgroups for phylogenetic studies within the major clades. We gathered sequences of nuclear and mitochondrial gene regions (28S, 18S, Histone 3, 16S-ND1, CO1) and used them to reconstruct salticid phylogeny by parsimony, likelihood and Bayesian methods. Our results confirm that lapsiines and hisponines are among the basal salticids, i.e. outside the major clade Salticoida. The lapsiines are resolved as sister group to the spartaeines. The precise placement of hisponines is unclear, but they may represent a deep-branching lineage independent from the spartaeines.
S1703	S. A. Belokobylskij;A. Zaldivar-Riverón;V. León-Regagnon;D. L. J. Quicke	2007	A new genus of the tribe Lysitermini (Hymenoptera, Braconidae, Lysiterminae) from Madagascar and its taxonomic placement based on 28S rDNA sequence data	Zootaxa							A new genus and species of Lysitermini, Atritermus pedestris Belokobylskij, Zaldivar-Riverón & Quicke (Hymenoptera, Braconidae), are described from Madagascar. The taxonomic placement of new genus within Lysiterminae is discussed on the basis of a phylogenetic analysis using sequence data from a fragment consisting of the second and third domain regions of the 28S rDNA gene. A key to World genera of Lysitermini is provided.
S1790	J. Just;G. D. F. Wilson	2007	Revision of Austrosignum Hodgson and Munnogonium George & Str√∂mberg (Paramunnidae) with descriptions of eight new genera and two new species, (Crustacea: Isopoda: Asellota)	Zootaxa							The paramunnid genera Austrosignum Hodgson, 1910 (type species A. glaciale Hodgson, 1910) and Munnogonium George & Strömberg, 1968 (type species M. waldronense George & Strömberg, 1968) are re-diagnosed. Twenty seven species are reviewed. Austrosignum is restricted to two described species, Munnogonium to five described species. The remaining 20 species are placed in the following eight new genera: Boreosignum (type species Austrosignum maltinii Schiecke & Fresi, 1972), Cryosignum (type species Paramunna lunata Hale, 1937), Meridiosignum (type species M. macquariensis sp. nov.), Tethygonium (type species T. quadricuspis sp. nov.), Quetzogonium (type species Austrosignum dentatum Winkler, 1994), Advenogonium (type species Austrosignum fuegiae Doti & Roccatagliata, 2005), Zizzygonium (type species Paramunna magellanensis Winkler, 1994), Kussakinella (type species Austrosignum spinosum Kussakin, 1982).
S1759	W. P. Maddison;J. X. Zhang;M. R. Bodner	2007	A basal phylogenetic placement for the salticid spider Eupoa, with descriptions of two new species (Araneae: Salticidae)	Zootaxa	1432		23-33				The southeast Asian genus Eupoa includes small salticid spiders with unusual palpi. Two new species of the genus are described. Two morphological characters (presence of a median apophysis in the male palp and of a tarsal claw in the female palp) suggest it is excluded from the main clade of salticids (the Salticoida). Sequences of nuclear and mitochondrial gene regions (28S, 18S, 16SˆND1, CO1), analyzed by parsimony and Bayesian methods, agree that Eupoa is a basal (non-salticoid) salticid, but fail to find a clear placement. Eupoa may represent a deep-branching lineage long separate from the lyssomanines, spartaeines, and other basal groups.
S1870	P. E. Marek;J. E. Bond	2007	A reassessment of apheloriine millipede phylogeny: additional taxa, Bayesian inference, and direct optimization (Polydesmida: Xystodesmidae)	Zootaxa							Millipedes in the tribe Apheloriini occur throughout the eastern United States, predominately in the deciduous forests of the Appalachian Mountains. Herein we present a reassessment of apheloriine millipede phylogeny using mitochondrial DNA sequences and an additional 29 exemplar taxa (including 15 undescribed species and all of the species in the genus <i>Brachoria</i>, except one). In this study, first we check the results of the previous phylogeny of the tribe (Marek and Bond, 2006) with different alignment and phylogenetic techniques (direct optimization and maximum likelihood), and second reconstruct a new phylogeny evaluating it in the same way with Bayesian, maximum likelihood, and direct optimization. Using this updated and expanded phylogeny, we tested historical classifications with Bayes factor and Shimodaira-Hasegawa hypothesis testing, consistently finding very strong evidence against their implied phylogenetic hypotheses. Lastly, using the new phylogeny as a foundation, we make taxonomic modifications and provide an updated species-list of Apheloriini (104 species/17 genera).
S1826	A. Nygren;F. Pleijel	2007	A new species of Myrianida (Syllidae, Polychaeta) from Belize	Zootaxa							We describe Myrianida gidholmi sp. n. from shallow waters in Belize. It is characterized by a unique colour pattern consisting of red transverse and longitudinal bands. We determine its phylogenetic position within Myrianida using a combined approach with morphological and molecular data. The new species is compared to relevant Myrianida taxa and important features for morphological identification are listed in a table. The new combinations Myrianida tyrrhenica (Cognetti, 1953) and M. cognetti (Çinar & Gambi, 2005) are introduced, and A. antondohrni Çinar & Gambi, 2005, is synonymized with M. tyrrhenica. We also provide a checklist of all taxa belonging to Myrianida.
S2061	S. B. Hedges;W. E. Duellman;M. P. Heinicke	2008	New World direct-developing frogs (Anura: Terrarana): Molecular phylogeny, classification, biogeography, and conservation	Zootaxa							New World frogs recently placed in a single, enormous family (Brachycephalidae) have direct development and reproduce on land, often far away from water. DNA sequences from mitochondrial and nuclear genes of 344 species were analyzed to estimate their relationships. The molecular phylogeny in turn was used as the basis for a revised classification of the group. The 882 described species are placed in a new taxon, Terrarana, and allocated to four families, four subfamilies, 24 genera, 11 subgenera, 33 species series, 56 species groups, and 11 species subgroups. Systematic accounts are provided for all taxa above the species level. Two families (Craugastoridae and Strabomantidae), three subfamilies (Holoadeninae, Phyzelaphryninae, and Strabomantinae), six genera (Bryophryne, Diasporus, Haddadus, Isodactylus, Lynchius, and Psychrophrynella), and two subgenera (Campbellius and Schwartzius) are proposed and named as new taxa, 13 subspecies are considered to be distinct species, and 613 new combinations are formed. Most of the 100 informal groups (species series, species groups, and species subgroups) are new or newly defined. Brachycephalus and Ischnocnema are placed in Brachycephalidae, a relatively small clade restricted primarily to southeastern Brazil. Eleutherodactylidae includes two subfamilies, four genera, and five subgenera and is centered in the Caribbean region. Craugastoridae contains two genera and three subgenera and is distributed mainly in Middle America. Strabomantidae is distributed primarily in the Andes of northwestern South America and includes two subfamilies, 16 genera, and three subgenera. Images and distribution maps are presented for taxa above the species level and a complete list of species is provided. Aspects of the evolution, biogeography, and conservation of Terrarana are discussed.
S2132	J. Liljeblad;F. Ronquist;J. L. Nieves-Aldrey;F. Fontal-Cazalla;P. Ros-Farré;D. Gaitros;J. Pujade-Villar	2008	A Fully Web-Illustrated Morphological Phylogenetic Study of Relationships among Oak Gall Wasps and Their Closest Relatives (Hymenoptera: Cynipidae)	Zootaxa	1796		1-73				Large morphological phylogenetics analyses are often poorly documented because of the constraints of traditional print journals, making it difficult to critically evaluate the data and build on it in future studies. We use modern information technology to overcome this problem in a comprehensive analysis of higher relationships among oak gall wasps and their closest relatives. Our morphological characters are documented by more than 2,000 images deposited in the open web image database MorphBank (http://www.morphbank.net), allowing one-click access from character and character state descriptions to the raw data. The oak gall wasps (Cynipidae: Cynipini) form one of the largest specialized radiations of galling insects with almost 1,000 described species attacking oaks or oak relatives. According to previous morphological studies, the oak gall wasps form a monophyletic clade, the Woody Rosid Gallers (WRG), together with three small cynipid tribes (Diplolepidini, Eschatocerini, and Pediaspidini). The WRG all attack woody representatives of the rosid clade of eudicots. Little was previously known about higher WRG relationships. We studied 54 exemplar taxa of WRG, including representatives from 34 of the 41 valid genera of oak gall wasps, and two outgroups. The study resulted in 308 characters, 283 from morphology and 25 from biology and distribution; most of these are original to the present paper. Parsimony analyses supported the monophyly of three major WRG lineages: Diplolepidini + Eschatocerini, Pediaspidini + Paraulax, and Cynipini. The poorly known South American genus Paraulax, developing in galls on Nothofagus, is moved from Cynipini to Pediaspidini to reflect these results. The single Japanese species described in Paraulax by Shinji (types lost) is transferred to Ceroptres as C. quereicola (Shinji 1938) comb. nov. Two major lineages of oak gallers were recognized in most analyses: (1) the Neuroterus-group (Neuroterus, Pseudoneuroterus, Trichagalma, Plagiotrochus, possibly also Palearctic Dryocosmus and Aphelonyx+Disholcaspis); and (2) the Cynips-group (Cynips, Belonocnema, Atrusca, Acraspis, Philonix, Biorhiza and Trigonaspis). The large and problematic genus Andricus was parahyletic in some analyses and monophyletic in others, with Disholcaspis spectabilis being the sister to other Cynipini in the former case and European Callirhytis in the latter. Our results suggest that WRG are conservative in their host plant preferences but there is no evidence for parallel insect-plant cladogenesis. Distributional patterns suggest a possible origin for the oak gall wasps in the Nearctic but the picture is otherwise complicated. Both heterogeny, the cyclical alternation of sexual and parthenogenetic generations, and heteroecy, the use of different sections of Quercus as host for the two generations, appear to have evolved twice within the WRG.
S2168	W. P. Maddison;M. R. Bodner;K. M. Needham	2008	Salticid spider phylogeny revisited, with the discovery of a large Australasian clade (Araneae: Salticidae)	Zootaxa							DNA sequence data from four gene regions (28S, 18S, 16S-ND1, and CO1) were gathered from 65 jumping spider (salticid) taxa to supplement previously gathered molecular data for the family's phylogeny. The additional taxa are mostly from Australasia and other regions of the Old World. Bayesian and parsimony analyses support a clade, here called the Astioida, representing a large proportion of the Australasian fauna. Included in the Astioida are, for example, the robust-bodied Simaetha and Mopsus, the flattened bark-dweller Holoplatys, the delicate foliage-dweller Tauala, the antlike Myrmarachne and the litter-dwelling Neon. One astioid, Rhondes neocaledonicus, is returned to that genus from its placement in Hasarius. Another newly supported clade, the Aelurilloida, includes the aelurillines, the freyines, and the Bacelarella group of genera. Other newly delimited clades are the Philaeus group (Philaeus, Mogrus, Carrhotus and others), the Leptorchesteae (Leporchestes, Yllenus and Paramarpissa) and the Hasarieae (Hasarius, Habrocestum and Chinattus). These results concur with previous discoveries (e.g., Amycoida, Marpissoida) in suggesting that salticid clades are largely restricted to continental regions.
S2251	S. A. Marshall;M. Buck;J. H. Skevington;D. Grimaldi	2008	Revision of the family Syringogastridae (Diptera)	Zootaxa							The New World family Syringogastridae (Diptera, Acalyptratae) is revised. Eleven new extant species are described in four newly recognized species groups of the single genus Syringogaster to give a total of 20 extant species (S. brachypecta, S. apiculata and S. tenuipes in the rufa-group; S. atricalyx, S. figurata, and S. plesioterga in the figurata-group; S. dactylopleura in the dactylopleura-group, and S. nigrithorax, S. brunneina, S. sharkeyi and S. palenque in the brunnea-group; Marshall & Buck are the authors of all extant new species). Two new fossil species, Syringogaster miocenecus Grimaldi and S. craigi Grimaldi are described, each based on a unique Miocene (ca. 17 myo) amber specimen from the Dominican Republic. Morphological and molecular characters are used to estimate phylogenetic relationships among species of Syringogastridae, and between Syringogastridae and related diopsids. The fossil species appear to form the sister group to the Central and South American S. figurata group, and reveal Antillean extinction of the family from earlier in the Tertiary.
S2547	M. P. Heinicke;W. E. Duellman;L. Trueb;D. B. Means;R. D. MacCulloch;S. B. Hedges	2009	A new frog family (Anura: Terrarana) from South America and an expanded direct-developing clade revealed by molecular phylogeny.	Zootaxa	2211		1-35				Three frogs found in cloud forests on two nearby mountains in Guiana were included in a molecular phylogeny of 17 nuclear and mitochondrial genes (10,739 aligned sites) that revealed that the closest relatives of these frogs are the Terrarana (Brachycephalidae, Craugastoridae, Eleutherodactylidae, and Strabomantidae) and the next-closest relatives are hemiphractid frogs. We place these frogs in a new family, genus, and species, which is strongly supported as the basal clade within Terrarana: Ceuthomantidae n. fam., Ceuthomantis smaragdinus n. gen, n. sp. Morphological evidence supports the placement of two other species from the Guiana Highlands, Pristimantis aracamuni (Barrio-Amorós & Molina) and P. cavernibardus (Myers & Donnelly), in the new family and genus. This close phylogenetic relationship of terraranans and marsupial frogs, nearly all of which have direct development, supports an hypothesis that direct development evolved early in the evolution of this huge clade (~1000 species), for which we propose the unranked taxonomic epithet Orthobatrachia.
S2478	V. Werenkraut;M. J. Ramírez	2009	A revision and phylogenetic analysis of the spider genus Coptoprepes Simon (Araneae: Anyphaenidae, Amaurobioidinae)	Zootaxa	2212		1-40				We review the spider genus Coptoprepes Simon, endemic of the southern forests in Chile and Argentina, and present a phylogenetic analysis of the 10 known species of the genus together with other 91 representatives of the family Anyphaenidae. Coptoprepes is confirmed as a member of the tribe Amaurobioidini. The sister group of Coptoptepes is the genus Negayan Ramírez. Both genera are united by having contiguous spermathecae and a notch retrolateral to the cymbial conductor, where the median apophysis fits. The synapomorphies of Coptoprepes (the tegulum being displaced basally, the copulatory openings on or close to the epigastric furrow, and the lacking of some leg macrosetae) are homoplasious in the tribe Amaurobioidini. Most intergeneric branches within the tribe, as well as between species of Coptoprepes have low support values in the cladogram. This is probably related to Coptoprepes species being heterogeneous in characters usually constant in spider genera, such as the presence of retrolateral tibial apophysis in the male palp, the copulatory ducts being wrapped along an axis, or the spherical shape of spermathecae. We describe six new species: Coptoprepes ecotono n. sp., Coptoprepes bellavista n. sp., Coptoprepes casablanca n. sp., Coptoprepes contulmo n. sp., Coptoprepes eden n. sp., and Coptoprepes recinto n. sp. We provide additional records, illustrations, and reviewed diagnosis of the four previously known species: Coptoprepes flavopilosus Simon, Coptoprepes nahuelbuta Ramírez, Coptoprepes campanensis Ramírez, and Coptoprepes valdiviensis Ramírez.
S2462	H. Wiklund;A. G. Glover;T. G. Dahlgren	2009	Three new species of Ophryotrocha (Annelida; Dorvilleidae) from a whale-fall in the North East Atlantic	Zootaxa	2228		43-56				Three new Ophryotrocha species are described from sites with high levels of organic carbon flux including a whale-fall at 125 m depth off the Swedish coast and sediment sampled at 104 m depth beneath a fish farm in a Norwegian fjord. Phylogenetic analyses based on the nuclear gene H3 and the mitochondrial genes COI and 16S using MrBayes and Maximum Likelihood analyses show that Ophryotrocha eutrophila sp. nov. is a close relative to Ophryotrocha puerilis, while Ophryotrocha craigsmithi sp. nov. falls together with Palpiphitime lobifera, and Ophryotrocha scutellus sp. nov. occur within the 'hartmanni' clade. The genus Ophryotrocha is in our study monophyletic only if the genera Iphitime and Palpiphitime are included. Two representatives of Ophryotrocha previously described from antropogenically enriched sediments are here reported for the first time in very high abundance from a natural habitat. We suggest that whale falls are important habitats for the evolution of ecosystem services such as degrading of complex organocarbon compounds.
